     1→
     2→
     3→This copy is a preprint that has been submitted for peer review.
     4→
     5→To cite this preprint: Uchida, A., Greenaway, Bianchi, V., Tamir, M., Kalokerinos, E. K. (in prep). Regulation Without Regulating? Exploring Misalignment Between Self-Reported Emotion Regulation Attempts and Strategy Use. 
     6→
     7→
     8→Regulation Without Regulating? Exploring Misalignment Between Self-Reported Emotion Regulation Attempts and Strategy Use
     9→Aya Uchida1
    10→Katharine H. Greenaway1
    11→Valentina Bianchi1
    12→Maya Tamir2
    13→Elise K. Kalokerinos1
    14→
    15→1Melbourne School of Psychological Sciences, University of Melbourne
    16→2Department of Psychology, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem
    17→
    18→
    19→Author Note
    20→Study 1 was not pre-registered, Study 2 and 3 pre-registrations and analytic code for all three studies are available at https://osf.io/43kx2/. The anonymized data for Study 1 and Study 2 are available at https://emotedatabase.com/requestid/LNL5NFE9N2. Data for Study 3 are available upon request to the authors. This research was supported by an Australian Research Council Discovery Project awarded to the second, fourth, and final authors (DP230100239), an Australian Research Council Future Fellowship awarded to the second author (FT190100300), and a University of Melbourne & Hebrew University of Jerusalem Joint Research Project awarded to the second, fourth, and final authors. Corresponding author: Aya Uchida, Melbourne School of Psychological Sciences, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Australia, aya.uchida@student.unimelb.edu.au.
    21→Abstract
    22→Theory suggests that in the process of emotion regulation, people form an intention to regulate, and then act on this intention. Although theory posits these are distinct yet sequentially linked stages, most research focuses on each stage in isolation. We addressed this gap in the literature by exploring how, and to what degree, self-reported attempts to regulate emotions are linked with self-reported regulatory behaviors in the form of commonly studied emotion regulation strategies. Across three experience sampling studies (Ntotal=683), we empirically tested the link between emotion regulation attempts and behaviors. We were particularly interested in occasions when these stages are disconnected: when people report making no attempt to regulate emotion, and yet report engaging in an emotion regulation strategy. We term this phenomenon emotion regulation misalignment and found it occurred in all three studies on 13-42% of occasions. We also explored whether misalignment was more or less prevalent for certain strategies and found that, although misalignment occurred for all strategies, it was most likely for suppression and social sharing, and least likely for reappraisal and distraction. In all, we provide evidence to suggest that behaviors intended to capture emotion regulation strategies can occur independent of intentional attempts at emotion regulation. This work has implications for how researchers measure emotion regulation and emotion regulation strategies, and how we theorize about what emotion regulation is.
    23→
    24→Keywords: Emotion Regulation, Emotion Regulation Strategies, Experience Sampling Methodology
    25→
    26→Regulation without Regulating? Exploring Misalignment between Self-Reported Emotion Regulation Attempts and Strategy Use
    27→        People commonly report that behaviors like listening to music, talking to a friend, or exercising influence how they feel. But when do these activities ‘count’ as emotion regulation?  Definitions of emotion regulation emphasize its goal-directed nature (e.g., Gross, 2015). Indeed, the field’s most prominent theoretical model suggests that to define a process as emotion regulation, such process must involve the activation of a goal to influence emotions (Gross et al., 2011). Theory argues that the activation of this goal directs the process of emotion regulation, preceding the selection or implementation of an emotion regulation strategy (Gross, 2015). This means that although behaviors such as listening to music, talking to a friend, or exercising may change one’s emotional state, unless engaged in with the intention to influence one’s emotions, these activities do not meet the conditions necessary to be labelled ‘emotion regulation strategies’. However, most research to date assesses these behaviors that may influence emotion, independent of whether the behaviors are performed in the service of influencing one’s emotion. As a result, we do not know how often people actually use so-called ‘emotion regulation strategies’ for the explicit purpose of regulating their emotions. In the present research, we grapple with this issue, exploring how often emotion regulation ‘strategies’ are coupled with an explicit intention to regulate emotions.
    28→The Emotion Regulation Process 
    29→        The central theoretical framework of emotion regulation is Gross’ (2015) Extended Process Model. This model articulates three stages in the process of emotion regulation. The process begins with the identification stage—in which people determine whether (or not) to initiate emotion regulation—which is followed by the selection stage—in which people determine which emotion regulation strategy to use—and finally the implementation stage—in which people action the chosen strategy. Rather than being discrete, these three stages are theorized to connect, such that one stage gives rise to the next. Yet these stages are generally assessed in isolation, with research siloed into a large camp focused on emotion regulation strategies (for meta-analyses, see Boemo et al, 2022; Naragon-Gainey et al., 2017; Webb et al., 2012), and a smaller body of work attending to goals and motives that begin the regulation process (e.g., Greenaway & Kalokerinos, 2021; Kalokerinos et al., 2017; Tamir, 2016). 
    30→Because research has tended to examine stages of the emotion regulation process separately, we know little about the degree to which they are linked. For instance, a glib reading of theory assumes that if people intend to regulate their emotions in the identification stage, they will go on to select and implement strategies in the subsequent stages. Considered in the opposite direction, a common field convention assumes that if people choose and implement a ‘strategy’ in the selection and implementation stages, they did so with the intention of regulating their emotions. Research is only beginning to connect the identification and selection stages (Tamir et al., 2019; Tamir & Gutentag, 2020). Consequently, we know little about how frequently the intention to regulate emotions translates to actual use of strategies (i.e., intentions linking to strategies). It is also unclear how often a behavior with the potential to change emotion is enacted for the explicit purpose of emotion regulation (i.e., strategies indicating the presence of an intention to regulate). 
    31→Do Behaviors that Change Emotion Reflect Intentions to Regulate Emotions?
    32→The vast majority of research on emotion regulation has focused on the methods people use to influence their emotions, generally termed emotion regulation strategies (see Webb et al., 2012 for a meta-analysis). Indeed, the original process model focused largely on ‘strategy families’ that are engaged along a timeline of emotion generation ranging from antecedent-focused strategies (used before or while emotion is generated) to response-focused strategies (used after emotion is fully generated; Gross 1998). Other research has distinguished behaviors that change emotion based on whether they are comparatively more adaptive or maladaptive for well-being (Aldao et al., 2010; Kalokerinos & Koval, 2022). Still more work categorizes behaviors into those that target cognitions versus behavior, and involve engaging with versus disengaging from the emotion-eliciting event (Parkinson & Totterdell, 1999). Further categorizing principles include whether people use strategies in more interpersonal or intrapersonal contexts (Zaki & Williams, 2013; Tran et al., 2023), or in controlled versus automatic ways (Braunstein et al., 2017). These categorizations have been foundational in supporting our knowledge about the ways people change their emotions, and the effects these different methods have on emotion. 
    33→Although research to date has done much to identify effective ways to change emotion, it is not always clear how often those activities are performed in the service of changing emotion. For instance, Boemo and colleagues (2022) conducted a meta-analysis of 76 studies on strategy use in daily life, and of the 280 items used to assess strategy use, only 18% explicitly mentioned engaging in a particular behavior for the purpose of changing emotion. The vast majority (~72%) of items assessed engagement in activities like rumination (e.g., “Have you brooded about something in the past”; Blanke et al., 2020), distraction (e.g., “Distracting oneself, engaging in physical activity, or doing something relaxing”; Blaxton & Bergman, 2017), or reappraisal (e.g., “Focused on positive thoughts”; Chaudhury et al., 2017) without the strategy itself mentioning whether these activities were performed with the purpose of changing emotion. As such, these behaviors might have been implemented for any number of reasons (e.g., to improve concentration; to be a supportive friend) other than the specific intention to regulate emotion. 
    34→Only a handful of items in Boemo et al.’s (2022) meta-analysis mentioned using strategies to regulate, influence, or change emotion, either directly (“I controlled my emotions by changing the way I thought about the situation”; emphasis added, Kneeland et al., 2020) or indirectly by implying the presence of an emotion regulation goal (“When I was feeling negative emotions, I was careful not to express them”; emphasis added, Le & Impett, 2016). This observation reflects a pervasive tendency in the field to assume people engage in a behavior that changes emotions for the explicit purpose of changing emotions. As a result of this assumption, it is not always clear how often people engage in strategy-like behaviors with (or without) the intention of regulating emotion. 
    35→Are Intentions Linked to Strategies?
    36→An emerging line of work focuses on the emotion regulation processes that are activated prior to strategy use. This literature shows that people regulate their emotions for a variety of reasons, whether to feel better (i.e., hedonic motives) or to achieve non-emotional outcomes (i.e., instrumental motives, Tamir, 2016; Kalokerinos et al., 2017). Research has also shown that having a goal to change one’s emotions is related to strategy use (Eldesouky & English, 2020; Greenaway et al., 2021), such that particular goals—like aiming to feel more negative emotion—predict greater likelihood of using particular strategies—like rumination (Millgram et al., 2019). That said, emotion regulation goals have largely been investigated independently from emotion regulation strategies, as captured in separate stages of the emotion regulation process. 
    37→Research investigating processes in the identification stage of the extended process model has made important inroads to understanding this understudied phase, but have also encountered roadblocks. For instance, in a meta-analysis of decisions to regulate, Matthews and colleagues (2021) noted that the identification stage is understudied relative to the selection or implementation stages. Nevertheless, Matthews and colleagues identified 219 studies assessing decisions to regulate, operationalized as (1) motivation to repair mood (7% of studies), (2) making a choice between regulation strategies (i.e., distraction and reappraisal; 29%), (3) making a choice between regulation stimuli (e.g., which video/music to engage with; 24%), (4) time spent with different stimuli (12%), and (5) preferences for strategies (29%). Unfortunately, the latter operationalizations (2-5)—which were by far the most common ways of assessing the identification stage (comprising 93% of studies)—fall into the ‘trap’ of assuming strategy selection indicates the presence of a goal to regulate one’s emotions. That is, this operationalization treats the goal to change one’s emotions and behavior that changes one’s emotions as proxies for one another. We argue that the two may not be interchangeable, and research would need to assess these stages independently, and examine how often they are reported in combination vs. separately. 
    38→Linking the Stages of Emotion Regulation 
    39→The mostly separate literatures on the identification and selection stages of emotion regulation tacitly assume that one stage follows, or is followed by, the other. The emerging literature on the identification stage assumes that once people decide to regulate their emotions, they go on to choose a strategy for doing so—to the point where strategy selection itself has been used as a measure of emotion regulation intention (Matthews et al., 2021). The comparatively large literature on emotion regulation strategies tends to use strategy endorsement as a proxy measure to indicate that intentional emotion regulation has taken place. 
    40→Despite their agreement on the general process of emotion regulation, these literatures generate different estimates of the prevalence of emotion regulation. On the one hand, the practice of assuming reports of strategy use indicate intentional emotion regulation has led to a conclusion that emotion regulation is common in everyday life, with people reporting using at least one strategy on the vast majority of sampling occasions (e.g., 88.9% of surveys, Wenzel et al., 2022; 75% of daily low points, English et al., 2016). On the other hand, research that examines attempts to regulate in daily life suggests that not regulating may be more common than regulating emotion, with people reporting not attempting to regulate their emotions on most sampling occasions (60% of surveys from Daniel et al., 2024; 52% from Lai et al., 2025; 78% from Uchida et al., 2026; and 61-86% from Kalokerinos et al., in prep). If people rarely report trying to influence their emotions, but commonly report engaging in activities that are known to influence their emotions, this pattern may indicate a disconnect between the first and later stages of the emotion regulation process.
    41→Tamir and colleagues (2019) argue for the need to differentiate the act of using strategies from the processes that come before strategy use. Across several studies, these authors found that emotion regulation goals and strategies are distinct constructs, but are often confounded. Although emerging work suggests certain goals do go hand-in-hand with selection of certain strategies (Greenaway et al., 2021; Millgram et al., 2019), because only limited research has examined both stages together, we know little about how often they align or misalign. 
    42→The Present Research 
    43→In the present research, we distinguished self-reported ‘attempts’ to regulate emotions from self-reported use of ‘strategies’ to regulate emotions. We measured emotion regulation attempts as occasions on which people reported “I tried to influence my emotions”. This measurement captures motivational striving in line with a goal to change how one feels, that is, engage in emotion regulation. We measured emotion regulation strategies as occasions on which people reported engaging in behaviors that map onto six commonly studied emotion regulation strategies: distraction (Sheppes et al., 2011), expressive suppression (Gross & John, 2003), cognitive reappraisal (Gross & John, 2003), rumination (Nolen-Hoeksema et al., 2008), social sharing (Rimé, 2009; Niven et al., 2009), and acceptance (Kohl et al., 2012). These measures map the strategy-space covered by much of the emotion regulation literature, and each represents a distinct categorization profile (e.g., adaptive/maladaptive; automatic/controlled). Table 1 illustrates strategy item wording and categorizations across studies.
    44→By separately measuring self-reported attempts to influence emotion from the means of influencing emotion, we can empirically test how often these stages are aligned vs. misaligned. Doing so allows us to document instances in which people report trying to influence their emotions and report using an emotion regulation strategy (reflecting emotion regulation alignment) as well as instances of emotion regulation misalignment. This misalignment can take two forms, in which people report (a) trying to influence their emotions but not using any ‘strategy’ to do so or (b) not trying to influence their emotions but using a ‘strategy’. We were most interested in the latter pattern, because ‘strategy use’ is a major focus in emotion regulation research, and we sought to document whether and how often ‘strategy use’ occurs in the absence of an intentional attempt to regulate emotions. The ‘failure to launch’ phenomenon, where people report trying to influence their emotions but do not report using any strategy, is a different case that may point to difficulty initiating emotion regulation (e.g., Uchida et al., in press). Although we document this phenomenon, we focused on the form of misalignment in which people report making no attempt to regulate and yet endorse behaviors that typically reflect emotion regulation strategies.    
    45→Our first aim was to investigate whether and how often emotion regulation misalignment occurs in everyday life. Our second aim was to investigate whether emotion regulation misalignment differs by strategy. We accomplished these goals by drawing on three studies using experience sampling methodology (ESM), which allows researchers to survey participants in their natural environment, multiple times a day for several days (Koval & Kalokerinos, 2024). ESM allowed us to establish how prevalent emotion regulation misalignment is across many emotionally resonant measurement occasions in daily life, as well as capturing instances of (non)attempts at regulation close in time to when they occur. This approach minimizes recall biases associated with retrospection on fleeting momentary experiences like emotions and emotion regulation. 
    46→In our analyses, we attempted to rule out potential explanations for misalignment with robustness checks. That is, we checked if potential misalignment occurred over and above careless responding in the form of faster reaction times, and feeling less emotional (i.e., times with less need or opportunity to regulate). Holistically, this analytic approach allowed us to investigate whether and in what ways people (mis)align attempts to influence how they feel and means of achieving emotional change. 
    47→Table 1. Strategy Item Wording and Categorizations 
    48→Note. *Distraction can be adaptive in contexts when negative emotion is intense (Sheppes et al., 2011); Suppression can be adaptive in certain sociocultural contexts (Hu et al., 2014; Kalokerinos et al., 2017).
    49→
    50→Transparency and Openness
    51→In Study 1, we were interested in describing and exploring the emotion regulation misalignment phenomenon, and thus our analyses were not pre-registered. We pre-registered our analytic strategy for Studies 2 and 3. These pre-registrations and code for all three studies are available at https://osf.io/43kx2/overview. Study 1 and Study 2 data are available at https://emotedatabase.com/requestid/LNL5NFE9N2, and Study 3 data is available upon request. 
    52→Study 1
    53→Study 1 was collected in Australia in 2020, and has been published elsewhere (Hu et al., 2024; Uchida et al., 2025). This study examined the link between emotion regulation attempts (yes/no) and strategies, assessing these as selection (yes/no) of common behaviors that influence emotion change. In this study, while strategy item wording made no mention of using the behavior with the intention of influencing emotion (as per the majority of daily life strategy studies; Boemo et al., 2022), the item stem indicated that participants should select all behaviors they used to change their emotions. This methodological convention is common in the field, and makes this study a good representation of how researchers have studied emotion regulation strategies in daily life. The study comprised three parts: a screener survey, a baseline survey, and a 7-day ESM period. The present investigation includes items only from the ESM portion of the study and only measures relevant to the current study are reported here. For the complete list of items see https://osf.io/43kx2/overview. 
    54→Method
    55→Participants
    56→The final sample included 173 Australia-based students and community members (76% female, Mage = 28.84, SD = 10.24; Ethnicity: White/Caucasian (50.3%), East Asian (17.3%), South Asian (16.2%), South-East Asian (9.8%), Mixed Race (2.9%), Middle Eastern (1.2%), Australian Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander (1.2%), African (.6%), and Latino/Hispanic (.6%). Most participants were recruited through community advertising (n = 107), 28 were recruited from a first-year student pool, and 38 from a paid research-participation platform. Participants were reimbursed up to AU$45 or 3% course credits for their participation: more detailed reimbursement information can be found in the Supplementary Materials. We aimed to recruit at least 152 participants to achieve 90% power to detect a small within-person effect (Murayama et al., 2020). We recruited a total of 183 participants to account for drop-out and excluded 10 participants who completed fewer than two surveys over the study period. 
    57→Design and Procedure
    58→ESM
    59→Adopting a stratified random interval scheme, smartphones were programmed to notify participants eight times a day between 10:00am and 8:00pm, with an average duration of 1 hour and 16 minutes between consecutive beeps, for seven consecutive days. The surveys were programmed to arrive at least 30 minutes apart, and participants had 20 minutes to respond before the survey expired. In total, participants were sent 56 surveys and showed good compliance overall (M = 73.14%, SD = 23.50%). After completion, participants were debriefed, reimbursed, and provided with access to a personalized report of their responses.
    60→Materials and Measures
    61→Emotion Regulation Attempts 
    62→        We asked participants to reflect on recent attempts to regulate their emotions with the item ‘Since the last survey, did you try to influence your emotions?’ Participants responded ‘Yes’ or ‘No’ to this question. We operationalized ‘Yes’ responses as attempting to regulate emotions, and ‘No’ as not attempting to regulate emotions. 
    63→Emotion Regulation Strategies
    64→We measured strategy endorsement with the item stem ‘Since the last survey, which of the following strategies did you use to change your emotions? Please select all that apply.’. Participants chose from a list of six strategies, see Table 1. Participants could also select the options ‘I used another strategy’, and ‘I did not use a strategy’, but we excluded these responses from analyses. We excluded ‘I used another strategy’ because it cannot be mapped onto specific strategy features, and ‘I did not use a strategy’ because we were interested in emotion regulation attempt-strategy misalignment. The option ‘I used another strategy’ was selected relatively infrequently, on average in only 9% of returned surveys.  
    65→Analytic Strategy 
    66→Responses completed in less than 650ms (3668 items; 0.02% of all items) and surveys that had more than 50% of the items completed in less than 650ms (149 surveys; 0.02% of all surveys) were removed prior to analysis, to reduce careless responses (Geeraerts, 2020). Descriptively, we inspected the frequency of surveys with and without emotion regulation attempts. We did this across the whole sample as a percentage for each individual, and as a percentage for each strategy. To test for (mis)alignment, we inspected the frequency of surveys without a reported emotion regulation attempt combined with strategy endorsement. To test for misalignment by strategy, we ran a series of multilevel models to investigate the direct effect of regulation attempts predicting strategy endorsement using the statistical software R (version 4.3.3) and the lme4 package (Bates et al., 2015). 
    67→Testing for Misalignment
    68→To test the direct effect of emotion regulation attempts on strategy endorsement, we ran logistic multilevel regression models (surveys nested within persons), including emotion regulation attempt (yes/no) as a fixed effect predictor with each strategy as the outcome, and included a random intercept and slope for regulation attempt per participant. 
    69→Strategy Differences in Misalignment
    70→To compare between strategies we ran three-level logistic models (strategies nested within surveys, nested within persons), testing whether certain strategies have a stronger association with a reported regulation attempt than others. We included a random slope per participant per survey number. For each model, we had three fixed effect predictors: emotion regulation attempt, strategy, and their interaction. Strategy was a dummy-coded variable with levels representing each of the strategies. Per each analysis, we changed the reference category to be the given strategy of interest. We ran the model multiple times changing the reference strategy, allowing us to test how each of the six strategies compared to one another in their association with emotion regulation attempts (for similar approaches, see Bianchi et al., 2024; Brans et al., 2013). A significant interaction term indicated that the association between emotion regulation attempt and strategy use was stronger or weaker for a particular strategy compared to other strategies. 
    71→Robustness Checks 
    72→There are some methodological reasons we may see misalignments between self-reported attempts to regulate and self-reported strategy use, which we attempted to control for in robustness checks. First, emotion regulation misalignment may reflect careless responding. To examine this possible explanation, we ran analyses controlling for response time on both the emotion regulation attempt and strategy variables. Controlling for response times made no substantive differences to results (see Table S5 in Supplemental Materials). Nor did response time predict the occurrence of a misaligned survey (b=.01, SE=.01, z=1.84, p=.07). Second, misalignment may reflect occasions when people do not experience strong emotions, and thus have little opportunity or need to report regulation. To test this possibility, we controlled for momentary (within-person) and trait-like (between-person) positive and negative affect, which made no difference to results (Table S7 in Supplemental Materials). 
    73→Results
    74→        Table 2 illustrates descriptive statistics for all three studies. In Study 1, participants reported no attempt at emotion regulation on a majority of surveys (62%). Showing emotion regulation misalignment, on 23% of these no-attempt surveys, participants subsequently endorsed using an emotion regulation strategy. All but one participant completed at least one survey where they reported no emotion regulation attempt, but subsequently endorsed a strategy. On the flipside, participants reported an attempt at emotion regulation on 38% of surveys. Showing the other form of emotion regulation misalignment, on 26% of these yes-attempt surveys, participants did not endorse an emotion regulation strategy.
    75→Table 2 
    76→Mean, Standard Deviation and Intraclass Correlations for Variables across Studies
    77→Note. ‘No-regulation misalignment’ = occasions people report no attempt to regulate but endorsed a strategy. ‘Yes-regulation misalignment’ = occasions people attempted to regulate but did not endorse a strategy. Strategies in Study 1 were measured dichotomously; results illustrate the % of surveys with an endorsed strategy. Strategies were measured continuously in Study 2 (0=not at all, to 100=very much), and Study 3 (1=not at all to 9=very much). To facilitate comparison across studies, we linearly rescaled Study 3 results to 0–100. 
    78→
    79→Figure 1, Panel A illustrates the average percentage of surveys on which each strategy was endorsed with and without emotion regulation attempts in Study 1. These figures highlight that every strategy was endorsed some of the time when participants reported no attempt to regulate (reflecting the type of misalignment that is our main focus), but was always endorsed relatively more when participants reported an attempt to regulate (reflecting emotion regulation alignment). 
    80→Testing for Misalignment by Emotion Regulation Strategy
    81→When testing the direct effect of attempts to regulate predicting each strategy, we found significant positive effects for all six strategies, see Table 3. The strongest effect was for reappraisal, where participants who attempted to regulate their emotions had 9.28 times greater odds of reappraising than those who did not attempt to regulate. The weakest effect was for acceptance, where participants who attempted to regulate their emotions had only 2.38 times greater odds of accepting than those who did not attempt to regulate. 
    82→
    83→Figure 1
    84→Emotion Regulation Attempts and Corresponding Strategy Use across Study 1 (Panel A), Study 2 (Panel B), and Study 3 (Panel C)
    85→A)                  B)  
    86→C)       
    87→Table 3
    88→Emotion Regulation Attempts Predicting Strategy Endorsement in Study 1
    89→
    90→Table 4
    91→Test Statistics Comparing the Strategies Using Three-Level Models in Study 1
    92→Note. Bolded strategies indicate a significant difference. The leading strategy on each line was set as the reference category. CI=confidence interval. We only report the comparisons between each strategy once, rather than repeating comparisons that are made in multiple models. The complete list of test statistics are in the supplementary materials, Table S10.
    93→
    94→Comparing Strategy Differences in Misalignment
    95→Models comparing strength of the association between emotion regulation attempts and strategy endorsement for each of the strategies revealed that some strategies showed a stronger alignment than others. Table 4 outlines the test statistics for these comparisons. There was a significantly stronger link between attempting to regulate and strategy endorsement for reappraisal than for all other strategies. Distraction had a stronger relationship with regulation attempts than rumination, social sharing, and acceptance, though did not differ from suppression. Suppression did not differ from social sharing, but had a stronger relationship with regulation attempts than rumination and acceptance, which did not differ in the strength of their associations with regulation attempts. 
    96→
    97→Discussion
    98→           Study 1 provided the first investigation of emotion regulation misalignment. Although this misalignment can take two forms, our main focus was on a phenomenon in which people report not attempting to regulate their emotions, but nevertheless endorse using strategies that influence emotions. We found evidence of this kind of misalignment: people reported using a strategy on 23% of surveys where they did not explicitly attempt emotion regulation. This kind of misalignment was most common for reports of using acceptance and rumination and least common for reappraisal and distraction. 
    99→Study 2
   100→Study 2 aimed to conceptually replicate Study 1 using a larger sample and slightly different measures for strategy endorsement. Whereas Study 1 had participants select all strategies used, Study 2 had participants rate how much they used each strategy on a 101-point slider scale. This different method of assessing strategy use allowed us to determine whether our findings replicate across measures of both strategy use and intensity—an important contribution given these two types of measures can sometimes be differently associated with other variables (Wenzel & Rowland, 2025). 
   101→Study 2 data were collected in Australia in 2024, and are published elsewhere (Uchida et al., in press). The study comprised three parts: a screener survey, a baseline survey and a 7-day ESM period. Only measures relevant to the current study are reported here. The present investigation only includes items from the ESM portion of the study. For the complete list of items see https://osf.io/43kx2/overview. 
   102→Method
   103→Participants
   104→The final sample included 326 Australian-based students and community members aged 18 to 66 (Mage = 26.11, SDage = 8.52). Our sample was mostly female (80.62%), with 16.92% identifying as male, 1.85% non-binary, and 0.61% preferring not to specify. Participants identified as East Asian (30.67%), Southeast Asian (25.46%), South Asian (10.74%), White or Caucasian (21.78%), Mixed (7.06%), Latino or Hispanic (2.15%), Middle Eastern (1.53%), and Other (0.61%). No data were collected on clinical diagnoses or disabilities. We aimed to recruit 330 participants for the larger study based on a priori power analyses, using Lafit et al.'s (2021) multilevel power simulation tool (see pre-registration https://osf.io/zntdg). Most participants were recruited from the community via online noticeboards, Facebook groups, newsletters, and physical flyers placed around the greater Melbourne area and were reimbursed AU$20 for completing baseline and up to AU$50 for ESM surveys, for more details see https://osf.io/zntdg.
   105→Design and Procedure
   106→ESM 
   107→The 7-day ESM period began the day after they completed the baseline survey. Adopting a stratified random interval scheme, smartphones were programmed to notify participants 10 times a day within a 14-hour window. Participants chose from three different windows based on their schedule: 7:30am – 9:30pm, 8:30am – 10:30pm or 9:30am – 11:30pm. Surveys were scheduled using signal-contingent pseudorandom sampling, with the average survey interval being 90.05 minutes (SD minutes = 13.77). Following each survey notification, participants had 30 minutes to finish the survey before it expired and became inaccessible. After completion, participants were debriefed, reimbursed, and provided access to a personalized report of their responses.
   108→
   109→
   110→
   111→
   112→Materials and Measures
   113→Emotion Regulation Attempts  
   114→We asked participants to reflect on recent attempts to regulate their emotions with the item ‘In the past hour, did you try to influence your feelings?’.Participants responded either ‘Yes’ or ‘No’. We operationalized ‘Yes’ responses as attempting to regulate emotions, and ‘No’ as not attempting to regulate emotions.
   115→Emotion Regulation Strategies 
   116→        Emotion regulation strategies were assessed with five separate items addressing each strategy, and began with the item stem ‘The last set of questions ask to what extent you have done various things with the aim of influencing/changing your feelings, in the last hour.’. Then participants rated on a continuous slider ranging from 0 (not at all) to 100 (very much), to respond. Each item began with the stem ‘In the last hour, have you…’, followed by: ‘avoided expressing your feelings?’ (Expressive Suppression), ‘distracted yourself from your feelings (or their cause)?’ (Distraction), ‘talked with someone about your feelings?’ (Social Sharing), ‘thought of other ways to interpret your feelings (or their cause)?’ (Reappraisal), ‘continually thought about your feelings (or their cause)?’ (Rumination). 
   117→Analytic Strategy 
   118→We excluded 1,009 ESM surveys (5.7% of total responses) from analysis because they showed evidence of careless responding, defined as surveys where the average response time per item was 1000ms or less (Jaso et al., 2022). We ran identical models as in Study 1, with the only difference being that the strategy use outcome variable was continuous rather than dichotomous, resulting in linear and not logistic models. We performed the same robustness checks as in Study 1, and found controlling for reaction times and momentary and trait-like emotion made no substantive differences to our results (see Supplementary Materials Tables S6, S8 and S11). As in Study 1, response time did not predict the occurrence of a misaligned survey (b = 1.78, SE = 1.03, z = 1.73, p = .08).  
   119→Results
   120→Table 2 presents descriptive statistics for all studies. Similar to Study 1, we found participants reported no emotion regulation attempt on a majority of surveys (78%). On 42% of these no-attempt surveys, participants subsequently reported using a strategy. On the flipside, when participants reported an attempt to regulate (22% of surveys), 9% did not include endorsement of any strategy. 
   121→Figure 1, Panel B illustrates the proportion of surveys where each strategy was endorsed with and without an attempt at emotion regulation. Again, this figure highlights that every strategy was used some of the time when participants reported no attempt to regulate, but every strategy was always used relatively more when participants reported an attempt to regulate.  
   122→Testing for Misalignment
   123→We again found that attempting emotion regulation positively predicted intensity of use of all emotion regulation strategies, see Table 5. 
   124→Table 5
   125→Emotion Regulation Attempts Predicting Strategy Endorsement in Study 2
   126→
   127→Strategy Differences in Misalignment
   128→Models that compared the strategies against one another revealed some strategies were more strongly linked with emotion regulation attempts than others. Table 6 outlines the test statistics and shows a strong link between attempting to regulate and intensity of strategy use for distraction, rumination, and reappraisal, which did not differ from one another. By contrast, suppression and social sharing showed a weaker link with emotion regulation attempts, and did not differ from one another.
   129→Table 6
   130→Test Statistics Comparing the Strategies Using Three-Level Models in Study 2
   131→Note. Bolded strategies indicate a significant difference. The leading strategy on each line was set as the reference category. CI = confidence interval. The complete list of test statistics are in the supplementary materials, Table S11.
   132→
   133→Discussion
   134→        Study 2 echoed Study 1 in finding that emotion regulation misalignment was relatively common: on average, an individual returned 42% of surveys where they reported not attempting to regulate their emotions but nevertheless reported engaging in behaviors that reflect an emotion regulation strategy. Conceptually replicating Study 1, we found that emotion regulation attempts significantly predicted the intensity of using all strategies, suggesting some baseline level of emotion regulation alignment. When comparing the strategies against one another, we found that distraction and reappraisal—and this time also rumination—were most strongly linked with active attempts at emotion regulation than the other strategies. These findings mostly followed Study 1, where we also found that distraction and reappraisal were more strongly linked with attempts to regulate than other strategies. Similar to Study 1, suppression and social sharing were least strongly predicted by emotion regulation attempts, suggesting they were less consistently aligned relative to other strategies. 
   135→Study 3
   136→Study 3 builds on Studies 1 and 2 in several ways. First, this study used different measures of emotion regulation attempts and strategy use. Unlike the previous studies, which asked about emotion regulation in general, Study 3 yoked emotion regulation attempts and strategies to ask specifically about downregulating negative emotion. Further, the item stem in Studies 1 and 2 referred to using strategies to change one’s emotions, but the items themselves do not mention using the strategy to change how one feels. By contrast, Study 3 explicitly tied strategy item wording to the goal of regulating (e.g., “I tried to reach out to someone else who would make me feel less bad”). These distinctions in wording have theoretical implications, given embedding emotion regulation direction within items should tie strategy wording more closely to the intention of regulating. If item wording is at least partly responsible for emotion regulation misalignment, we might expect to see lower rates of misalignment in Study 3 than in the previous studies. 
   137→In addition to item wording, Study 3 differed from Studies 1 and 2 in item measurement. Studies 1 and 2 had participants report attempts on a binary scale (Yes/No), whereas Study 3 had participants rate their attempts on a 9-point Likert scale. Study 3 also used a 9-point Likert scale to indicate strategy use, whereas Study 1 had participants ‘select all that apply’ and Study 2 had participants rate their strategy use on a 101-point slider. Finally, Study 3 was conducted in Israel and Studies 1 and 2 were conducted in Australia. The present data are part of a larger study, collected in 2023 and published elsewhere (Hu et al., 2025). It comprised three parts: a baseline assessment, an ESM study, and a follow-up assessment. Only measures relevant to the current study are reported here. The present investigation only includes items from the ESM portion of the study. The complete list of items is available upon request.  
   138→Method
   139→Participants
   140→Participants were 184 Israeli community members, (82% female and 18% male, Mage = 24.28, SDage = 2.37). The original study compared depressed and non-depressed individuals, therefore, 94 participants were diagnosed with current Major Depressive Disorder (MDD) and 90 never experienced any mental health disorders. Based on power analyses (Murayama et al., 2022), the larger study aimed to recruit a minimum of 120 participants and oversampled to recruit 189 participants at baseline. Participants received up to $US50.50 or 19 course credits for finishing the entire ESM study.
   141→Design and Procedure
   142→ESM 
   143→Participants received smartphone survey notifications via SEMA3 (O'Brien et al., 2024), scheduled using a stratified random interval scheme, dividing the day into six equal windows to occur six times a day, between 10 am and 10 pm, for 10 days. Participants had 30 minutes to complete the survey, and at least 30 minutes between prompts to avoid overlap. In each survey, participants reported their degree of emotion regulation and emotion regulation strategy endorsement. In total, participants were sent 60 surveys and showed good compliance overall (M = 74.33%, SD = 23.14%; depression status did not affect compliance, p =.545).
   144→Materials and Measures
   145→All measures were completed on a 1 = not at all to 9 = very much scale. 
   146→Emotion Regulation Attempts 
   147→        We asked participants to reflect on recent attempts to regulate their emotions with the item ‘In the last two hours, to what extent have you tried to decrease your negative emotions?’ To mirror Studies 1 and 2, we created a dichotomous regulation goal variable by operationalizing a response of 1 (aligned with the anchor “not at all”) as reflecting ‘No’, participants did not attempt to regulate emotions and responses 2-9 as reflecting ‘Yes’, participants attempted to regulate emotions.
   148→
   149→
   150→Emotion Regulation Strategies 
   151→Emotion regulation strategies were assessed with six separate items addressing each strategy, and began with the item stem ‘In the last two hours, to what extent have you done the following things to decrease your negative emotions?’. Each strategy was measured with an individual item: I focused on what made me feel bad and thought about it over and over again (Rumination), ‘I tried to distract my mind away from what made me feel bad and think about other things’ (Distraction), ‘I changed the way I think about things, so they became less negative’ (Reappraisal), ‘I tried to accept my negative emotions as they are, without judging them’ (Acceptance), ‘I avoided expressing my negative emotions’ (Expressive Suppression), and ‘I tried to approach someone who would make me feel less bad’ (Social Sharing). 
   152→Analytic Strategy 
   153→Surveys in which participants failed an attention check (n =29), or responded in less than 60 seconds (n =40) were excluded. These exclusions resulted in a final sample of 8,206 surveys. In Study 3, we ran identical models as in Study 2. As reaction time for each item was not measured, we did not perform the reaction time robustness check, but controlling for momentary and trait-like affect, made no substantive differences to our results (see Supplementary Materials, Table S9 and S13). In addition, given that this study recruited groups of depressed and non-depressed participants, we tested whether MDD diagnosis predicted regulation attempts and misalignment, and repeated our model analyses controlling for depressive status. The additional model results did not differ from the models without depression and are reported in Table S4 in the Supplementary Materials.
   154→Results
   155→Table 1 shows descriptive statistics. Instances of non-regulation were less common in this study (36%) than in the previous studies (62% and 78%). Of the surveys with no attempt, 13% showed some degree of strategy use, revealing a lower level of misalignment than the previous two studies (23% and 42%). On the flipside, when participants reported an attempt to regulate (64% of surveys), 51% of these surveys included no endorsement of an emotion regulation strategy. 
   156→Figure 1, Panel C again highlights that every strategy was used some of the time when participants reported no attempt to regulate, but strategies were always used relatively more when participants reported an attempt to regulate (versus not). When testing the effect of MDD on regulation attempts and misaligned surveys, people with MDD were significantly more likely to report attempting to regulate relative to people without MDD (b = 1.58, SE = .05, z = 30.77, p < .001), but MDD did not predict misalignment (b = .07, SE = .07, z = 1.01, p = .31). 
   157→Testing for Misalignment
   158→As in the two other studies, we found that attempting emotion regulation positively predicted intensity of use of all emotion regulation strategies, see Table 7. 
   159→Table 7
   160→Emotion Regulation Attempts Predicting Strategy Use in Study 3
   161→
   162→Strategy Differences in Misalignment
   163→Models that compared the strategies against one another revealed that some strategies were more strongly linked with emotion regulation attempts than others. Table 8 outlines the test statistics and shows the strongest link between attempting to regulate and intensity of distraction, which was significantly different than with all other strategies. In addition, rumination showed the weakest link with emotion regulation attempts. 
   164→Table 8
   165→Test Statistics Comparing the Strategies Using Three-Level Models in Study 3
   166→Note. Bolded strategies indicate a significant difference. The leading strategy on each line was set as the reference category. CI = confidence interval. The complete list of test statistics are in the supplementary materials, Table S12.
   167→
   168→Discussion
   169→        Study 3 echoed Studies 1 and 2 by observing occasions on which people report not attempting to regulate their emotions while endorsing behaviors designed to capture emotion regulation strategy use. In this study, however, we found that emotion regulation misalignment was relatively uncommon, with only 13% of surveys showing this form of responding pattern (relative to 23% in Study 1 and 42% in Study 2). 
   170→Replicating Studies 1 and 2, we found that emotion regulation attempts positively predicted all strategies. When comparing the strategies against one another, distraction was the most strongly linked with emotion regulation attempts (as in Study 2), and rumination was most weakly linked with emotion regulation attempts (similar to Study 1). 
   171→General Discussion
   172→The aim of this work was to examine the link between stages of the emotion regulation process. Although theory suggests that the process of emotion regulation begins with a goal to regulate, and regulatory behaviors such as emotion regulation strategies follow, the field has little insight into how often these two stages are, in fact, connected. Instead, emotion regulation strategies are often measured without yoking strategy use to an emotion regulation goal, such that strategies are often assessed as a proxy for intentional attempts at emotion regulation. Exploring the basis of this assumption, we investigated how often self-reported attempts to regulate and self-reported behaviors designed to capture emotion regulation strategies are aligned versus misaligned.
   173→Emotion Regulation Alignment and Misalignment
   174→All three studies showed that attempting emotion regulation consistently predicted use of every strategy. This pattern of alignment indicates that all strategies are more likely to be used when people intentionally attempt to regulate their emotions versus not (and thus generally meet the bar for being termed ‘emotion regulation’ strategies). Robustness checks also found that this effect held when controlling for careless responding (Studies 1 and 2), positive and negative affect intensity (all studies), and depression status (Study 3). Thus, while people may report behaviors that change emotion outside of attempts to regulate, it is significantly more likely that these behaviors are used in alignment with attempts to regulate. Further, this link between attempting to regulate and using a strategy to regulate does not appear to be an artifact of careless responding or dependent on how people feel in the moment or dispositionally.
   175→Despite the overall prevalence of emotion regulation alignment, we found consistent evidence for emotion regulation misalignment across the three studies. This phenomenon reflects a pattern whereby people report not attempting to regulate while endorsing behaviors designed to capture emotion regulation strategies. The average prevalence varied, ranging from 13% in Study 3, to 23% in Study 1, and 42% in Study 2. Despite variation, these results indicate that emotion regulation misalignment is present across different cultural contexts and when using different measures. The existence of misalignment gels with emerging theory that argues setting a goal to regulate and striving towards that goal via strategies are independent processes (Tamir et al., 2019; Tamir et al., 2020). Our findings build on this theory by suggesting that attempting to regulate emotions and endorsing regulatory behaviors are distinct processes that can diverge and misalign. As a result, behaviors designed to capture emotion regulation strategies should not be used in isolation, or taken as a proxy for active emotion regulation. More broadly, our findings suggest that emotion regulatory behaviors are not always engaged to intentionally regulate emotions, and that researchers should be careful in determining whether a given behavior therefore represents an emotion regulation strategy. 
   176→ The disconnect between emotion regulation attempts and behaviors highlights that the field needs to establish a better way to faithfully define and assess emotion regulation. Refining the boundaries of emotion regulation can help the field decide whether, or rather when, common activities that affect people’s emotions (e.g., listening to music, exercising) constitute emotion regulation strategies. Hard-line adherence to a definition that centres intentional attempts to change emotion (Gross et al., 2011) would suggest that strategy endorsement in the absence of deliberate attempts to regulate does not constitute emotion regulation. 
   177→While this definition characterizes emotion regulation as intentional, it specifically mentions that this does not necessitate emotion regulation to be conscious (Gross et al., 2011). One might suggest that emotion regulation misalignment could represent implicit or automatic emotion regulation. Implicit emotion regulation is thought to represent emotion regulation that occurs without an individual’s explicit awareness, and is often operationalised using neuroimaging techniques (Mauss et al., 2007; Braunstein et al., 2017). However, we do not believe our findings show the necessary evidence level to conclude implicit emotion regulation has taken place. Our studies asked participants to self-report on regulation attempts and behaviors, meaning participants were aware of, and explicitly reporting on, their emotion regulation experiences. In other words, when participants selected a regulatory behavior—whether or not this was paired with an explicit attempt to regulate—they were explicitly reporting on engaging in that strategy. 
   178→
   179→Hence, emotion regulation misalignment in our studies is assessed at the purely explicit level, and cannot be considered representative of implicit emotion regulation. Evidence for implicit emotion regulation would require alternative methods of assessment, other than self-report.
   180→Differences in Misalignment Prevalence
   181→Across studies, we found some differences in the rate of emotion regulation misalignment. Notably, we found less misalignment in Study 3 than in other studies, possibly due to fewer instances of not attempting emotion regulation in this study (36% in Study 3, relative to 62% and 78% in Studies 1 and 2). We see two possible explanations for this difference in attempts across studies. First, half (51%) of Study 3 participants were diagnosed with Major Depressive Disorder (MDD), and MDD diagnosis significantly predicted greater likelihood of attempting to regulate. However, we found no evidence to support the notion that MDD predicts emotion regulation misalignment. 
   182→Another interpretation is that the reduced frequency of misaligned surveys in Study 3 could be explained by the specificity of the measures in this study. Study 3 asked about attempts and use of strategies in relation to downregulating negative emotion specifically, as opposed to regulating in general (as in Study 1 and 2). This item wording may have enabled participants to recall a specific instance of downregulating negative emotions, resulting in more reports of attempting to regulate (as most emotion regulation is in the service of prohedonic goals; Kalokerinos et al., 2017), and fewer misaligned surveys. In contrast, item wording in Studies 1 and 2 did not yoke the strategy to a specific emotion regulation goal. Arguably, item wordings in Studies 1 and 2 were representative of the field standard. In a meta-analysis consisting of 280 measures of emotion regulation strategies in daily life (Boemo et al., 2022), only nine items (3%) included the specification that a strategy was used to feel less negative/more positive. Hence, it is possible that much of what the field currently assumes to be emotion regulation (i.e., via strategy endorsement) is not. 
   183→We see two ways of applying the insights from our research for greater methodological rigor. First, researchers could embed emotion regulation intentions into strategy wording by asking in each strategy item if participants engaged in the behavior in order to change how they feel. This remains a relatively uncommon practice in daily life studies (Boemo et al., 2022), but our findings suggest this approach could help constrain emotion regulation misalignment. Second, to be sure intentional emotion regulation is assessed per se, researchers could capture emotion regulation attempts alongside strategy use. Using these measures, researchers could then assess the impact of emotion regulation strategies only on surveys in which participants indicated an intentional attempt to regulate emotions. Doing so would more closely adhere to the field’s current definition of emotion regulation as intentional attempts to influence the intensity, frequency, or duration of an emotional trajectory (Gross et al., 2019). 
   184→Differences in Strategy Misalignment
   185→In addition to examining emotion regulation misalignment in general, we assessed whether it is more or less common for specific types of behaviors (i.e., ‘strategies’). Table 9 summarizes the results across all three studies. Although every strategy was consistently more likely to be used when participants reported attempting to regulate versus not, strategies differed consistently in how strongly they were linked to regulation attempts. These findings suggest a spectrum of strategies that are differently aligned with intentional emotion regulation. This spectrum appears to range from distraction and reappraisal, which showed high alignment with regulation attempts, through to acceptance, suppression, and social sharing, which showed moderate to low alignment. Rumination was inconsistently associated with regulation attempts, showing moderate alignment in Study 1 and Study 2, and low alignment in Study 3. 
   186→Table 9
   187→Summary of Study Characteristics and Results 
   188→Note. ER = Emotion Regulation. 
   189→While these results do not cleanly map the many existing dimensions that strategies have been categorized into, there is some evidence that adaptive and/or controlled strategies may show stronger alignment. For example, reappraisal is thought to be adaptive in that it is typically associated with more positive and less negative emotion (Aldao et al., 2010; Webb et al., 2012). Further, distraction is thought to be adaptive—easy to implement and effective at downregulating emotion—when emotion is particularly intense (Sheppes et al., 2011). Both strategies are relatively controlled (requiring top-down deliberate engagement; Braunstein et al., 2017) and both were consistently the most ‘aligned’ with emotion regulation attempts. In contrast, suppression and rumination are considered maladaptive for well-being as they are associated with increases in negative emotion (Aldao et al., 2010, Aldao & Nolen-Hoeksema, 2012) and may be more automatic (less deliberately engaged) strategies. Both strategies were relatively ‘misaligned’, though rumination less consistently so across studies (notably Study 2). 
   190→Another way of viewing our results is that interpersonal strategies—social sharing and suppression—were consistently among the most misaligned. This finding may be explained by the fact that these strategies are dependent on the presence of other people and thus initiated externally rather than through individual attempts. In the case of social sharing, other people may prompt the individual to share their emotions (through the process of extrinsic interpersonal emotion regulation; Zaki & Williams, 2013), rather than the individual self-initiating the sharing process. In the case of suppression, people may face external social demands to hide emotions in particular situations (e.g., at work or in a competition, for a review see Greenaway & Kalokerinos, 2017). These contextual constraints may explain how sharing and suppression could be initiated without a corresponding individual attempt to regulate one’s emotions. 
   191→Limitations and Future Directions 
   192→Despite its contributions, our work is not without weaknesses. One notable limitation is that our results are correlational and cannot disentangle the order of effects regarding attempts to regulate and the use of regulation strategies. Although the emotion regulation attempt item always appeared before the strategy item, our analyses nevertheless test for associations between these items concurrently (i.e., in the same survey). Thus, in cases of alignment, the link between emotion regulation attempts and strategy use could operate in two directions. First, it may be that when one decides to regulate their emotions, they then consciously review available strategies and choose the one(s) most likely to achieve this end. Second, if emotion changes after using a particular strategy, people may post-hoc assume an emotion regulation attempt took place (consistent with self-perception theory, Bem, 1972). One way to disentangle the direction of this relationship would be to ask the emotion regulation attempt item in a random selection of surveys for each person. Including the measure of emotion regulation attempt in a portion of surveys, would test whether people endorse the emotion regulation ‘strategies’ differently when asked about regulation attempts versus not. 
   193→Another limitation is that the present work only assesses a finite range of emotion regulation strategies. Though we measured six well-documented strategies, we acknowledge there are a range of other behaviors people can engage in to regulate their emotions (Heiy & Cheavens, 2014; Rodriguez & Kross, 2023). In addition to strategies we did not ask about, it is possible that people enacted strategies that they were unable to recognize, recall or report (i.e., implicit forms of emotion regulation strategies). Future work could broaden our investigation – which focused on explicit emotion regulation – by going beyond self-report, although this will require careful theorizing and measurement concerning implicit or sensory forms of emotion regulation (Guevarra et al., 2026; Rodriguez & Kross, 2023).  
   194→Finally, more work is needed to understand the role of careless responding in misalignment. In our analyses with careless responding, we used response time as a proxy, theorizing that faster responses would indicate less time spent thinking before responding (Jaso et al., 2022). We found emotion regulation misalignment persisted when accounting for careless responding. While we could have controlled for conscientiousness or ESM compliance as alternative proxies for careless responding, prior work shows neither of these individual differences reliably predicts ESM response quality (Courvoisier et al., 2012; Soyster et al., 2019). As such, we did not consider these factors to be good candidates for capturing careless responding. 
   195→One avenue for future research could be to qualitatively assess response processes around misalignment, by asking participants what happened when they returned misaligned surveys. For example, when surveys record that a participant has reported using a strategy but not attempted regulation, this misaligned survey could trigger open-ended questions about this experience. Prompting in this way would help researchers identify whether participants are deliberately or mistakenly reporting emotion regulation misalignment, as well as providing greater insight on the experience of misalignment itself. 
   196→Conclusion
   197→We identify and demonstrate the phenomenon of emotion regulation misalignment, in which people report engaging in behaviors designed to capture emotion regulation strategies, when reporting not attempting to regulate their emotions. This phenomenon occurred across three studies, but was least common in studies that more explicitly tied strategy use to the goal of regulating (13% of surveys in Study 3). Emotion regulation misalignment was more common in studies that asked about strategy use in general after an introductory sentence indicating that the following items asked about attempts to influence emotions (23% and 42% of surveys in Studies 1 and 2, respectively). Certain strategies were more aligned with active attempts to regulate emotions than others. Notably, reappraisal and distraction—relatively adaptive for changing momentary emotion—were consistently most aligned with attempts to regulate. Further, suppression and sharing—our two social strategies—tended to be least aligned with attempts to regulate. In sum, we find that engaging in behaviors that change emotions may not necessarily reflect emotion regulation attempts. 
   198→References 
   199→Aldao, A., Nolen-Hoeksema, S., & Schweizer, S. (2010). Emotion-regulation strategies    across psychopathology: A meta-analytic review. Clinical psychology review, 30(2),      217-237. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpr.2009.11.004   
   200→Bianchi, V., Greenaway, K. H., Slepian, M. L., & Kalokerinos, E. K. (2024). Regulating  emotions about secrets. Emotion, 24(6), 1386. https://doi.org/10.1037/emo0001357 

[showing lines 1-200 of 253; use offset=201 with limit to continue reading]