     1→Anxiety modulates sensitivity and response bias in the AX CPT task
     2→
     3→Garima Joshi & Bhoomika R Kar
     4→Centre of Behavioral and Cognitive Sciences, University of Allahabad, Prayagraj, Uttar Pradesh, India
     5→ 
     6→Address for Correspondence 
     7→Bhoomika R. Kar, Ph.D.
     8→Professor
     9→Centre of Behavioral and Cognitive Sciences (CBCS),
    10→University of Allahabad
    11→Prayagraj-211001
    12→Uttar Pradesh, India
    13→Email: bhoomika@cbcs.ac.in 
    14→Abstract
    15→Anxiety is associated with altered cognitive control; however, the nature of this alteration may differ across three levels of trait anxiety and generalized anxiety disorder (GAD). We examined whether anxiety modulates proactive and reactive control in a context processing task, AX Continuous Performance Task (AX-CPT). In Experiment 1a, healthy young adults varying in trait anxiety level were grouped into low, medium, and high trait anxiety categories and completed the AX-CPT. High trait anxious participants showed preserved overall task performance, contextual sensitivity, stronger cue-based expectancy bias and greater susceptibility to probe-level interference than medium and low trait anxious participants. In Experiment 1b, GAD participants were compared with high trait anxious participants on the same task. The GAD participants demonstrated reduced contextual sensitivity, lower cue and probe discriminability, poorer overall performance but a comparable strategic response bias, indicating less precise maintenance and use of contextual information. In turn, this suggests that the effects of high trait anxiety are manifested in the modulation of strategic weighting of predictive cues without affecting the proactive control mechanism, while GAD is associated with a general decrease in the fidelity of context representation. Thus, the anxiety-related differences in cognitive control involve not only quantitative but also qualitative distinct patterns of cue-based preparation and contextual implementation.
    16→Introduction
    17→Anxiety has long been associated with alterations in cognitive control, though not always in the form of global deficits. The Dual Mechanisms of Control (DMC) framework helps understanding this pattern by distinguishing proactive control—the anticipatory, sustained maintenance of goal-relevant information—from reactive control—the transient, on-demand response to conflict (Braver, 2012; Fales et al., 2008). Evidence from Stroop and other conflict tasks suggests that high trait anxious (HTA) participants do not fail at control outright but show a bias in control modes. In an emotional face Stroop task, the high-trait-anxious (HTA) often show poorer performance and greater conflict-related activation on incongruent trials, while still showing conflict adaptation which suggests intact reactive adjustments (Krug & Carter, 2010, 2012). Non-emotional Stroop studies similarly report exaggerated trial-by-trial neural markers of conflict monitoring and attentional reallocation despite preserved overall accuracy (Osinsky et al., 2010, 2012). Thus, these findings indicate that anxiety may be associated with greater reliance on the reactive control process with reduced sustained engagement of proactive control. 
    18→While Stroop and similar conflict paradigms have been invaluable in demonstrating heightened reactive engagement in individuals high in trait anxiety, they offer only a partial view of control dynamics. These tasks rely on the immediate resolution of stimulus–response interference and therefore primarily capture reactive adjustments made once conflict is detected. Because they provide little pre-stimulus information, they are limited in their ability to assess proactive control, which depends on the sustained maintenance of contextual information before conflict arises. In some conflict tasks, anxiety has been associated with weaker maintenance of contextual cues in working memory, which may lead individuals to rely more on reactive control. However, such findings do not necessarily indicate whether proactive control is unavailable or simply under-recruited when task structure does not support it. Supporting this view, a flanker task study found individuals with high social anxiety showed signs of proactive dlPFC-related regulation, along with heightened reactive conflict monitoring. This pattern was interpreted as compensatory recruitment rather than the absence of proactive control (Schmid et al., 2015). Similarly, in an emotional Stroop task, highly trait-anxious individuals appeared to engage compensatory control mechanisms rather than showing a complete breakdown of proactive regulation (Yu et al., 2018). However, Yang et al. (2018) further suggest that the effects of anxiety may vary across contexts, too. They found that state anxiety reduced proactive control in the AX-CPT task while increasing the reactive control in the Stroop task, indicating that anxiety can disrupt proactive control under certain conditions even when reactive adjustment remains preserved.
    19→Developmental and context-processing research also supports the idea that proactive control might benefit from task structure. For example, improvements in context processing with age have been linked with smaller increases in anxiety symptoms over time in behaviorally inhibited youths (Valadez et al., 2022). Similarly, research using the AX-CPT suggests that structured task contingencies and clear contextual representations can encourage the use of proactive control (Alzahabi et al., 2022). Altogether, this evidence suggests that cue-based and context-structured paradigms such as the AX-CPT may be better suited to capturing aspects of proactive control that remain available but are less evident in traditional conflict tasks.
    20→Thus, the structured contingencies of the AX-CPT provide a useful contrast to conflict paradigms such as the Stroop task. Unlike Stroop and related tasks, the AX Continuous Performance Task (AX-CPT) was specifically designed to dissociate proactive and reactive modes of control by manipulating cue–probe contingencies (Braver et al., 2009; Lesh et al., 2013; Mäki-Marttunen et al., 2019a). In this paradigm, cue–probe sequences create conditions in which proactive preparation—through sustained maintenance of cue information—is especially important for successful performance on BX trials, whereas AY trials provide leverage on expectancy violation and response adjustment. Emerging evidence demonstrates that task structure within the AX-CPT strongly shapes the balance between these modes. For example, Gonthier et al. (2016) found that explicit training and strong cue–probe contingencies shifted participants toward proactive strategies, improving BX trial accuracy and enhancing sustained prefrontal activation. Fröber and Dreisbach (2012)  (Fröber & Dreisbach, 2012) likewise showed that valid and frequent cues naturally promoted proactive engagement, whereas this shift diminished under conditions that suppress preparatory control. More recently, Mäki-Marttunen et al. (2018) (Kubota et al., 2020; Mäki-Marttunen et al., 2019b) and Kubota et al. (2020) extended this work by showing that AX-CPT performance can reveal important variation in control recruitment in populations with lower baseline efficiency or anxiety-related vulnerability. Altogether, these findings focused on a critical distinction that conflict-processing tasks primarily emphasize reactive resolution of interference, whereas context-processing paradigms such as the AX-CPT provide a richer framework for examining how anxious individuals recruit proactive control, under what conditions it emerges, and how it interacts with reactive adjustments.
    21→Extending this line of inquiry to clinical anxiety, findings from generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) suggest that diagnostic status may influence control recruitment in ways that cannot be explained by trait anxiety alone. Although both HTA and GAD are characterized by heightened worry and vigilance, individuals with GAD often show additional difficulties in maintaining attention and sustaining contextual information over time (Han et al., 2023; Newman et al., 2013; Yiend et al., 2015). However, behavioral evidence for these findings is inconsistent. Some studies report relationships between inhibition and worry in GAD (Price & Mohlman, 2007), whereas others have found no clear behavioral differences on Stroop tasks despite observing altered neural markers of conflict monitoring (Larson et al., 2013). Furthermore, impairments in GAD performance also varied across tasks, with reduced accuracy in the Stroop task but relatively preserved performance on another inhibitory task (Hallion et al., 2017). This suggests that these deficits may depend on specific task demands rather than reflecting a broad impairment. Electrophysiological findings further add to this complexity, as altered error-related and conflict-related potentials indicate that individuals with GAD may recruit control differently, rather than simply less efficiently (Cavanagh et al., 2017). More importantly, recent work also points to neurocognitive discontinuities between HTA and GAD. Connectivity analyses suggest that GAD—but not high worriers without diagnosis—shows altered basolateral amygdala–vmPFC coupling during control-related processing (Porta-Casteràs et al., 2020). Likewise, behavioral findings suggest that individuals with GAD may respond slowly and make more errors under conditions involving performance monitoring, whereas high trait-anxious individuals may maintain performance by recruiting greater compensatory effort. Altogether, these findings suggest that GAD may not simply reflect a more severe form of HTA, but may instead reflect a different pattern of control recruitment characterized by reduced contextual stability and less efficient use of control.
    22→Overall, the current literature points to two important research gaps. First, even though the findings from conflict paradigms generally suggest that HTAs rely on reactive control to a greater extent, these paradigms cannot clarify whether such reliance reflects a fixed limitation in control abilities or simply a task-specific preference for reactive responding. In contrast, context-processing paradigms such as the AX-CPT allow a more direct way to examine whether HTAs are capable of engaging proactive strategies when contextual information makes them advantageous. Addressing this issue is important for understanding whether trait anxiety reflects an underlying deficit in control itself or a tendency to adopt particular control strategies under conditions of uncertainty and varying task demands and structure. 
    23→Second, despite similarities in levels of worry, individuals with GAD may differ from HTAs in a more fundamental way in their ability to sustain and implement context-based control. Existing findings indicate that individuals with GAD may be less efficient in integrating information over time, show difficulties in sustaining attention, and display qualitatively different patterns of control recruitment compared with HTAs (Porta-Casteràs et al., 2020). But however, few studies have directly compared these two groups within the same context-processing paradigm. The AX-CPT is particularly well-suited for addressing this question because it differentiates proactive and reactive control while also allowing examination of whether diagnostic status modifies the relationship between trait anxiety and control recruitment.
    24→Current study
    25→The present study aims to investigate how trait anxiety and generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) influence the recruitment of cognitive control in the AX-CPT task. Specifically, it examined whether anxiety is linked to a reduced ability to engage proactive control or with a more specific change in how control is implemented. Because the AX-CPT distinguishes cue-based preparation from probe-driven responding, it provides an effective framework for testing whether anxiety affects the balance between proactive and reactive modes of control.
    26→The study addressed two primary objectives. First, it examined whether individuals with high trait anxiety can recruit proactive control on the AX-CPT and, if so, whether this recruitment reflects preserved contextual processing accompanied by a stronger cue-based response bias rather than a generalized impairment in cognitive control. This question was investigated in Experiment 1a, which compared low, medium, and high-trait-anxious groups. The aim was to determine whether differences across anxiety levels reflect a rigid dependence on reactive responding or, instead, a more subtle change in the way predictive cues are used to guide performance.
    27→The second objective of the study is to examine how individuals with GAD differ from high-trait-anxious participants in their recruitment of cognitive control in the AX-CPT task. Experiment 1b investigated this objective by comparing individuals with GAD and high-trait-anxious individuals. It aimed to examine whether differences between the two groups were primarily quantitative, as indicated by slower responses and reduced accuracy, or qualitative, as reflected in weaker contextual representation, less efficient cue maintenance, and different strategic biases. In this way, the study sought to clarify whether GAD represents a quantitative extension of trait anxiety or a qualitatively distinct pattern of control recruitment.
    28→Methods
    29→AX–CPT Paradigm
    30→The AX version of the Continuous Performance Task (AX–CPT; (Braver et al., 2009) was used to assess cognitive control. Participants viewed sequences of cue and probe letters and were instructed to make a target response only when the cue “A” was followed by the probe “X” (AX trials). All other combinations (AY, BX, BY) required a non-target response.
    31→AX trials were presented at high frequency (70%), creating expectancy and response biases. These biases allow assessment of how effectively participants maintain and use contextual cues to guide responses. Specifically, performance on BX trials reflects the ability to inhibit prepotent responses, whereas performance on AY trials reflects the tendency to anticipate a target response following an A cue.
    32→Cognitive control was quantified using accuracy, reaction times, and derived indices including signal detection parameters (d′ and C) and the Proactive Behavioral Index (PBI), which summarizes how participants implement proactive versus reactive control strategies (see Measures of Control).
    33→Experiment 1a: Levels of anxiety and recruitment of proactive/reactive cognitive control
    34→Participants
    35→Seventy-seven healthy adults (43 women) aged 18–30 years (M = 22.45, SD = 3.20) were recruited from the University of Allahabad. All participants reported normal or corrected-to-normal vision. A priori power analysis (G*Power 3.1; (Faul et al., 2007) indicated a minimum sample size of 75 required to detect an effect size of partial η² = .19 with .95 power, based on prior research (Edwards, 2010; Paxton et al., 2008). 
    36→Participants completed the State–Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI; Spielberger et al., 1983). Raw scores on the Trait Anxiety subscale (Y2) were converted to T scores. Those scoring below the 15th percentile were classified as low trait anxious (LTA), those between the 45th and 55th percentiles as medium trait anxious (MTA), and those above the 85th percentile as high trait anxious (HTA). This resulted in 26 LTAs, 26 MTAs, and 25 HTAs.
    37→The study was approved by the University of Allahabad Institutional Ethics Committee, and written informed consent was obtained from all participants. Participants were provided monetary compensation of INR 50 for their participation in the behavioral experiment.
    38→Stimuli and Procedure
    39→The experiment was implemented using E-Prime version 2.7 (Psychology Software Tools, Pittsburgh, PA) and presented on a CRT monitor with a refresh rate of 60 Hz. Participants were seated approximately 60 cm from the screen in a dimly lit room.
    40→Stimuli consisted of letters presented in Baskerville Old Face Bold, font size 32, in white against a black background. Each letter measured approximately 2 cm in height and 0.5 cm in width, corresponding to a visual angle of 1.82° × 0.44°. Cue letters were A and B, and probe letters were X and Y.
    41→Each trial began with a fixation cross for 800 msec, followed by a cue presented centrally for 200 msec. After a 150 msec blank interval, a probe appeared for 300 msec. Participants were instructed to press the left arrow key with the right index finger for AX trials and the right arrow key with the right middle finger for all other cue–probe combinations. Responses were allowed up to 1000 msec after probe onset.
    42→The trial composition was 70% AX trials and 30% non-target trials (10% each of AY, BX, BY). Participants completed 960 trials across six blocks (160 trials per block), following a 40-trial practice session.
    43→
    44→Figure 1: A basic trial structure in an AX-CPT paradigm where a cue is followed by a probe. Participants make a target response for AX trials and a non-target response for any other cue-probe pair. The proportion of trials was as follows: target trials (AX; 70%), non-target trials (30%: AY, BX, BY (10% each)). Participants were instructed to press the LEFT ARROW key with the index finger of their right hand as quickly as possible for target trials and to press the RIGHT ARROW key with the middle finger whenever they observed a non-target trial. 
    45→Measures of cognitive control
    46→In addition to accuracy and reaction times, three sets of derived indices were used to quantify cognitive control in the AX–CPT. These measures summarize how participants utilize cue and probe information, and whether they rely more on proactive or reactive control strategies.
    47→A-cue indices
    48→These indices capture how participants prepare responses after seeing the cue “A.” If participants strongly rely on proactive control, they are likely to anticipate an “X” and prepare a target response, which leads to both high hit rates on AX trials and increased false alarms on AY trials. To quantify this, we computed: A-cue sensitivity (A-cue d′): the ability to discriminate between valid (AX) and invalid (AY) probes after an A-cue, calculated as Z(H) – Z(F). Higher values indicate better sensitivity to probe identity in the presence of an A-cue. A-cue bias (A-cue C): the tendency to make a target response whenever an A-cue appears, computed as –0.5 × [Z(H) + Z(F)]. More negative values indicate a stronger bias toward anticipating target responses.
    49→X-probe indices
    50→These indices reflect how participants use cue information to regulate responses when the probe is “X.” Because “X” often signals a target, it creates a strong prepotent bias to respond. Proactive control helps suppress this bias when “X” is preceded by a non-A cue (BX trials). To quantify this, we computed: X-probe sensitivity (X-probe d′): the ability to discriminate between target AX trials and misleading BX trials, calculated as Z(H) – Z(F). Higher values indicate better utilization of contextual cues to override the prepotent “X” response. X-probe bias (X-probe C): the overall tendency to treat any “X” as a target, calculated as –0.5 × [Z(H) + Z(F)]. More negative values indicate a stronger response bias toward “X.” Proactive Behavioral Index (PBI). The PBI provides a composite measure of whether performance is more strongly shaped by proactive versus reactive control. It compares the relative interference from AY versus BX trials.  
    51→Proactive Behavioral Inhibition (PBI) index 
    52→PBI (AY–BX/AY+BX) was calculated separately for error rates and RTs. Positive values indicate greater interference on AY trials (consistent with proactive control), while negative values indicate greater interference on BX trials (consistent with reactive control). A loglinear correction was applied to error rates to adjust for zero-error cells (Hautus, 1995).
    53→Statistical Analysis
    54→Analysis was based on the reaction times (RTs) and accuracy (error rate %). The minimum range for adequate accuracy was set at 80% overall accuracy. Based on this criterion, two participants were excluded (one from the HTA and another from the LTA group), and the data from the remaining 75 participants were subjected to further analysis. Only correct trials were used for the RT analysis, and error trials were used for error rate analysis. Reaction times were further filtered by eliminating the anticipatory responses and/or late responses. Outlier criteria involved removal of the trials beyond the range of ±3 SD from the condition-specific means and within each group for RTs (milliseconds) and error rates (%). On average, 3 to 5% trials were removed from each participant based on these criteria.
    55→Data were analyzed using mixed-design ANOVAs with Group (LTA, MTA, HTA) as a between-subjects factor and Trial Type (AX, AY, BX, BY) as a within-subjects factor. Effect sizes are reported as partial η². Where omnibus effects were significant or marginal, planned comparisons were conducted. Assumptions of sphericity were evaluated using Mauchly’s test, with Greenhouse–Geisser corrections applied when necessary.
    56→Derived indices (A-cue d′/C, X-probe d′/C, PBI) were analyzed using the same ANOVA structure to assess proactive versus reactive control patterns across groups. All analyses were conducted in JASP Team (2021; v0.15) with significance set at p < .05, two-tailed.
    57→Results
    58→Reaction time analysis
    59→A two-way mixed ANOVA with 3 (Group: LTA, MTA, HTA) * 4 (Trial Type: AX, AY, BX, BY) design was performed with reaction time and error rate (%) data. A significant main effect of group on task performance, F (2, 72) = 3.022, p = 0.055, η2p = 0.077 was observed. Pairwise comparisons indicated that LTAs (M = 356.33 msec) are significantly faster than MTAs (M = 394.66 msec), t (72) = - 2.46, p = 0.043. However, LTAs (M = 356.33 msec) and HTAs (M = 375.49 msec), t(72) = -1.20, p = 0.45, and MTAs and HTAs, t (72) = 1.22, p = 0.45, did not differ significantly.
    60→The main effect of Trial-Type was significant, F (2.00, 144.30) = 687.28, p < 0.001, η2p = 0.905 (Greenhouse-Geisser corrected). Post hoc comparisons showed that AY trials (M = 518.21 msec) were slower than AX (M = 364.71 msec), BX (M = 310.87 msec), and BY (M = 308.22 msec) trials, all ps < .001. AX trials were slower than BX trials, t (72) = 8.37, p < .001, but BX and BY trials did not differ, t (72) = 0.93, p = .354 (Refer to Table 1).
    61→The interaction between Anxiety and Trial Type, F (4.00, 144.30) = 0.670, p = 0.68, η2p = 0.018, was not significant 
    62→Table 1: Descriptive statistics in AX-CPT task as a function of three levels of trait anxiety: LTA, MTA, HTA. 
    63→
    64→Note: Here AX, AY, BX, and BY are the trial types. A cue d’, A cue C, X probe d’ and X probe C are the signal detection parameters computed in the task. Average RTs are represented in milliseconds; average errors are represented as % of incorrect responses.  Values in parentheses are the standard deviations. PBIRT: PBI calculated on RTs. PBIERR: PBI calculated on errors.
    65→Error rate analysis
    66→There was no significant main effect of group on error rates, F (2,72) = 0.316, p = 0.730, η2p = 0.786. However, the main effect of trial type was significant, F (1.14, 82.16) = 265.13, p = 0.000, η2p = 0.786. AY trials (M = 31.84%) had the highest error rates compared to AX (M = 2.75%), BX (M = 5.68%), and BY trials (M = 2.70%) (All ps < 0.001). Whereas AX trials had lower error rates than BX trials, t(72) = -6.50, p < 0.001, BX and BY trials were comparable(Refer to Table 1). 
    67→A non-significant interaction between group and trial type was also observed, F (2.28, 82.17) = 1.18, p = 0.320, η2p = 0.032.
    68→ The non-significant Group × Trial Type interactions for both reaction time and error rate (*ps* > .05) suggest that trial-type effects did not differ across anxiety groups. To examine group differences at a more mechanistic level, we conducted planned independent-samples t-tests on signal detection parameters and report effect sizes with 95% confidence intervals.
    69→
    70→Figure 2: Performance of Trait Anxiety groups (Levels of Anxiety) in AX-CPT task as a function of Reaction Times (Panel A) and Error Rates (Panel B). LTAs were faster than MTAs, and HTAs didn’t differ significantly from either LTAs or MTAs. AY trials were slowest as compared to other trial types, irrespective of anxiety levels. Error rates didn’t differ as a function of trait anxiety. AY trials have the highest error rates as compared to other trial types. Error bars are represented as the standard error of the mean.
    71→Signal Detection Parameters 
    72→A-cue index: Sensitivity and Response Bias to A-Cues as a Function of Trait Anxiety
    73→In terms of sensitivity to A cues (A-cue d'), high trait anxious (HTAs; M = 2.50) individuals were comparable to both low trait anxious (LTAs; M = 2.54) and medium trait anxious (MTAs; M = 2.54) individuals. There was no significant difference between HTAs and LTAs, t (47) = -0.25, p = 0.80, d = -0.07, or between HTAs and MTAs, t (48) = -0.29, p = 0.77, d = -0.08 (Refer to Table 1, Figure 2).
    74→However, in terms of response bias, HTAs (M = -0.81) demonstrated a significantly more liberal bias than MTAs (M = -0.67), t (48) = -2.23, p = 0.03, d = -0.632. Whereas no such significant difference in response bias was observed between HTAs and LTAs, HTAs (M = -0.81) vs LTAs (M = -0.75), t (47) = -0.87, p = 0.38, d = -0.24. 
    75→These results indicate that while groups did not differ in their discrimination sensitivity (d'), HTAs were more likely to adopt a liberal decision criterion towards making a target response in the presence of an A-cue, suggesting top-down expectations produced by the A-cue strongly influenced their performance. 
    76→Furthermore, LTAs and MTAs also did not differ significantly on any of the A-cue indices. For A cue d', LTAs (M = 2.54) and MTAs (M = 2.54) showed no significant difference, t (49) = 0.0005, p =1.00, d = 0.00015. Similarly, no significant differences were observed in A-cue C: LTAs (M = -0.75) and MTAs (M= -0.67), t (49) = -1.14, p = 0.259, d = -0.320 (Refer to Table 1, Figure 2). These results indicate that LTAs and MTAs did not significantly differ in the extent to which a target response was prepared in the presence of an A-cue.
    77→X-probe index: Sensitivity and Response Bias to X-Probes as a Function of Trait Anxiety
    78→In terms of sensitivity to X-probe, results were like A-cue d'. The high trait anxious (HTAs; M = 3.70) were found to be comparable with both low (LTAs; M = 3.88) and medium trait anxious (MTAs; M = 3.56). There were no significant differences between HTAs and LTAs t (47) = -0.98, p = 0.33, d = -0.28, or between HTAs and MTA t (48) = 0.78, p = 0.43, d = 0.22.
    79→However, in terms of response bias (X probe C), HTAs (M = -0.21) showed more interference from the prepotent response from X probes than LTAs (M = -0.08), t (47) = -2.80, p = 0.007, d = -0.280. While no significant differences were found between HTAs and MTAs (M = -0.173), t (48) = -0.766, p = 0.44, d = -0.21 (Refer to Table 1). 
    80→Additionally, LTAs and MTAs did not differ significantly on any of the X probe indices. For X probe d', LTAs (M = 3.88) and MTAs (M = 3.56) showed no significant differences, t (49) = 1.72, p = 0.092, d = 0.482. Similarly, for X probe C, no significant differences were found between LTAs (M = -0.087) and MTAs (M = -0.173), t (49) = 1.77, p = 0.08, d = 0.498, too.
    81→
    82→Proactive Behavior Index
    83→The high trait anxious (HTAs; M = 0.26) were comparable to both low (LTAs; M = 0.28) and medium trait anxious (MTAs; M = 0.23) on the Proactive Behavior Index calculated with RTs (PBIRT). There were no significant differences between HTAs and LTAs, t (47) = -0.912, p = 0.366, d = -0.26. Likewise, there were no significant differences between HTAs and MTAs, t (48) = 0.901, p = 0.372, d = 0.255.
    84→The high trait anxious demonstrated a pattern similar to PBIRT for the Proactive Behavior Index based on error rates (PBIERR). No significant differences were observed between HTAs (M = 0.69) and LTAs (M = 0.74), t (47) = -0.926, p = 0.36, d = -0.26. Likewise, there were no significant differences between HTAs (M = 0.69) and MTAs (M = 0.60), t (48) = 1.374, p = 0.176, d = 0.389 (Refer to Table 1).
    85→Meanwhile, significant differences were observed between low trait anxious (LTAs; M = 0.27) and (MTAs; M = 0.23) for Proactive Behavioral Index based on RTs (PBIRT), t (49) = 1.97, p = 0.054, d = 0.55. Likewise, significant differences were observed between LTAs (M = 0.74) and MTAs (M = 0.60) for the Proactive Behavioral Index based on error rates (PBIERR), t(49) = 2.15, p = 0.02, d = 0.59. Thus, the lower the trait anxiety, the higher the proactive behavior index, resulting in greater recruitment of proactive control.
    86→Thus, the three groups didn’t differ in context processing as measured by A cue d’. However, HTAs experienced a greater response bias, X probe C (greater interference from prepotent responses on BX trials), compared to LTAs, as well as a greater response bias, higher A cue C (liberal criterion due to greater expectancy of A cues). No such differences regarding the A cue and X probe indices were found between LTAs and MTAs. However, LTAs and MTAs significantly differ for the proactive behavioral index (PBIRT as well as PBIERR); LTAs had a higher index for proactive control than MTAs.
    87→
    88→
    89→Discussion 1a
    90→In the AX-CPT task, the proactive control is indicated by low BX and higher AY error rates, suggesting active maintenance of contextual information and stronger expectancy for the frequent A–X pairing. While the reactive control relies more on probe-driven processing (Braver, 2012; Gonthier et al., 2016). In Experiment 1, all participants, regardless of trait anxiety level, showed the canonical AX-CPT signature of proactive control: slower response time (RT) and higher error rates on AY trials, combined with low error rates on BX trials. Error rates on BY trials were significantly lower than on BX and AY trials, but did not differ significantly from AX trials. It reflects a floor effect on AX errors instead of a better performance on BY trials. Importantly, high-trait-anxious (HTA) participants did not differ from low-trait-anxious (LTA) or medium-trait-anxious (MTA) participants in overall accuracy or RT across most trial types. The only robust behavioral difference was that LTAs responded faster than MTAs, with no RT differences between LTAs and HTAs or between HTAs and MTAs (Refer to Figure 2). Thus, in a classic context-processing paradigm, HTAs were behaviorally as efficient as other groups, suggesting that they can recruit proactive control when task structure supports it.
    91→This pattern of results differs from what has been usually observed in conflict paradigms such as Stroop, antisaccade, and flanker tasks, where HTAs often show greater interference and poorer performance (Ansari & Derakshan, 2011; Basten et al., 2011; Bishop, 2009; Pacheco-Unguetti et al., 2010). However, previous research suggests that HTAs can flexibly recruit top-down control when task demands strongly support goal-directed behavior (Berggren & Derakshan, 2013; Eysenck et al., 2007). The present findings are consistent with this view.
    92→No significant group differences were observed in A-cue sensitivity (A-cue d′), suggesting that across different levels of trait-anxiety, sensitivity to cue–context information was preserved. However, HTAs showed a more liberal A-cue bias (A-cue C) than MTAs, indicating that HTAs treated the A cue not simply as a task rule but as a predictive signal that generated stronger preparatory expectancy for an upcoming response. Repeated exposure to the highly probable A–X contingency may have strengthened this anticipatory tendency toward target responding. Importantly, this more liberal criterion did not lead to increase in AY error costs, indicating that HTAs enhanced AX readiness without greater false alarms.
    93→Consequently, HTAs showed greater reliance on the predictive structure of the task during preparatory processing. This viewpoint is supported by previous studies that have shown stable cue–probe contingencies can facilitate anticipatory control and response readiness irrespective of the working memory demands (Chiew et al., 2016; Matute et al., 2014; Walsh et al., 2024). Similar findings have also been reported in task-switching paradigms, where cue-based preparation facilitates intentional task activation and reduces interference from stimulus-driven responding. Altogether, these findings suggest task cues may function not only as abstract rule indicators but also as preparatory signals (Koch & Allport, 2006). One of the possible explanations for such expectancy-based preparation is associative learning, where repeated exposure to the frequent A–X contingency may strengthen cue–probe expectancies and promote anticipatory responding (Abrahamse et al., 2016; Verguts & Notebaert, 2009; T. Wang et al., 2019).
    94→X-probe sensitivity (X-probe d′) was comparable across groups, but HTAs showed a more liberal X-probe criterion (X-probe C) than LTAs, reflecting greater susceptibility to prepotent target activation by X probes. Preserved X-probe sensitivity indicates intact contextual processing at the probe stage; thus, the HTA-specific increase in bias likely reflected a shift in response criterion rather than impaired context integration. The liberal X-probe criterion in HTAs may reflect overgeneralization of the dominant A–X contingency: even when preceded by a B cue, X automatically activates the well-learned target response, creating greater stimulus–response competition that must be inhibited. This pattern is consistent with findings suggesting increased processing "noise" during reactive processing and greater interference from familiar cue–probe associations (Irlbacher et al., 2014; Lositsky et al., 2015; Van Wouwe et al., 2011). It is also in line with evidence linking high trait anxiety to greater costs of stimulus–response competition and difficulty resolving prepotent interference (Berggren & Derakshan, 2014; Holtmann et al., 2013; Wilson et al., 2018; H. Yang et al., 2021).
    95→Overall, these findings suggest that HTAs may show a hybrid control profile, defined by stronger cue-based preparation under stable contingencies along with greater probe-level interference at the probe stage when reactive control is required. Their liberal A-cue bias and intact PBI appear to reflect selective expectancy-driven preparation rather than a generalized enhancement of proactive control. LTAs and MTAs showed broadly similar SDT profiles, differing primarily in the strength of proactive behavioral indices. This pattern suggests distinct patterns of proactive control across anxiety levels rather than a simple linear anxiety-related deficit. Overall, the findings across the levels in PBI and bias parameters suggest that changes in control with increasing anxiety may not follow a straightforward pattern. Instead, trait anxiety may influence not only the amount of control that is engaged but also how control is expressed, through differences in cue expectancy, sustained maintenance, and ability to resolve reactive interference.
    96→Study 1b: Recruitment of proactive/reactive cognitive control and generalized anxiety disorder
    97→Experiment 1a suggests that elevated trait anxiety is not associated with a simple reduction in proactive control. Instead, HTAs appeared capable of effectively using cue-based preparation when task contingencies were stable, although this was accompanied by stronger expectancy-driven response tendencies and greater vulnerability to interference during probe processing. These findings raise an important question about the transition of control from elevated trait anxiety to clinical anxiety. Specifically, it remains unclear whether GAD reflects a quantitative amplification of the same expectancy-based control patterns observed in HTAs, or whether it represents a qualitatively different difficulty in maintaining and using contextual information. Experiment 1b addressed this issue by comparing individuals with GAD to HTAs on the same AX-CPT paradigm. More specifically, the study investigated whether the shifts from elevated trait anxiety to GAD were primarily related to differences in proactive preparation (indexed by criterion measures), the quality of contextual representations (indexed by sensitivity measures), or the efficiency with which contextual information is used to guide behavior (indexed by PBIs and behavioral outcomes)
    98→Methods
    99→Participants
   100→A total of 29 healthy participants with high trait anxiety (age range: 18 - 35 years; Mean age = 22.68 years, SD = 3.79) were recruited from the University of Allahabad. Participants were selected based on their STAI scores, with all having a T-score above the 85th percentile on STAI-T. All HTA participants reported no current history of psychiatric illness and were not using any psychoactive medications. A clinical sample of 35 individuals meeting DSM criteria for generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) was recruited through referrals from the outpatient psychiatry services at Swaroop Rani Hospital, Motilal Nehru Medical College, Allahabad (age range = 18–40 years; M = 25.58, SD = 5.01). These individuals had been experiencing symptoms of GAD for at least six months or more and had no history of other anxiety disorders, such as Post Traumatic Stress Disorder, specific phobias, panic disorders and/or obsessive-compulsive disorder. Participants also had no current depressive symptoms and no history of neurological disorders like epilepsy (not a case of medically induced anxiety). Those with a history of drug abuse, except smoking or tobacco chewing (not a case of substance-induced anxiety disorder), were excluded to avoid cases of substance-induced anxiety disorder.
   101→The study was ethically approved by the Institutional Ethics Committee of the University of Allahabad, and written informed consent was obtained from all participants. Participant received a monetary compensation of INR 200 for their participation in the experiment.
   102→Table 2: Demographics and questionnaire information for GAD and HTA participants in the study. 
   103→ 
   104→Note: Here, GAD -7 refers to the Generalized Anxiety Disorder - 7 questionnaire, BDI -2 refers to the Beck Depression Inventory, and RPM refers to the Raven’s Progressive Matrix. Scores on questionnaires are represented as mean values with standard deviations in brackets. 
   105→Screening Measures
   106→Generalized Anxiety Disorder–7 (GAD-7).
   107→The GAD-7 (Spitzer et al., 2006) is a seven-item self-report measure assessing the severity of generalized anxiety symptoms over the past two weeks. Total scores range from 0 to 21, with cut-off scores of 5, 10, and 15 indicating mild, moderate, and severe anxiety, respectively. The Hindi version of the GAD-7 was used in the present study. All participants, irrespective of the GAD scores, were included in the study. GADs (M = 9.66) were found to have a higher score than HTAs (M= 7.28) on the GAD-7 scale, t (56) = 2.02, p = 0.04. 
   108→Beck Depression Inventory–II (BDI-II).
   109→Depressive symptoms were measured using the Beck Depression Inventory–II (BDI-II; Beck et al., 1996), a 21-item self-report scale assessing cognitive, affective, and somatic symptoms of depression. Scores range from 0 to 63 and are interpreted as minimal (0–13), mild (14–19), moderate (20–28), or severe (29–63). The Hindi version of the BDI-II (Kushwaha, n.d.) was administered. GAD also had a higher score on BDI-II, GAD (M = 22.97) vs HTA (M = 17.69), t (56) = 2.20, p = 0.03. However, none of the participants in either of the two groups were diagnosed with clinical depression at the time of their participation or in the last 6 months of their participation in the study. 
   110→Raven’s Progressive Matrices (RPM).
   111→Fluid intelligence was assessed using Raven’s Progressive Matrices (RPM; Raven et al., 1936), a non-verbal measure of abstract reasoning consisting of 60 items arranged in increasing difficulty. The GAD and healthy control groups were matched with respect to fluid intelligence: GAD (M = 49.13) vs HTA (M = 50.58), t (56) = -1.23, p = 0.226. Refer to Table 2.
   112→Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-5 (SCID-5)
   113→Clinical diagnoses of generalized anxiety disorder were established by a licensed psychiatrist using DSM-5 criteria. As a complementary diagnostic measure, the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-5 Disorders—Research Version (SCID-5-RV) was administered only to participants in the GAD group by the first author, trained in SCID administration, in accordance with recommendations from the supervising clinician and psychiatrist. All interviews followed standardized SCID-5 procedures and were used to systematically confirm GAD diagnoses.
   114→Stimuli and Procedure
   115→The task, stimuli, and procedure were identical to Experiment 1. Participants performed the AX–CPT with the same stimulus characteristics and response mappings. Control indices (d′-context, Proactive Behavioral Index, and C) were derived in the same manner as in Experiment 1.
   116→The only modification concerned the number of trials. In Experiment 2, participants completed 800 trials across five blocks (Experiment 1: 960 trials across six blocks). This reduction in the number of trials was implemented to minimize fatigue in the GAD sample. However, the relative proportion of trial types was preserved (AX = 70%; AY, BX, BY = 10% each).Refer to Figure 1 for trial structure of the experiment 1b.
   117→Results
   118→Reaction Time
   119→A 2 (Anxiety Group: GAD, HTA) x 4 (Trial Type AX, AY, BX, BY) mixed-design ANOVA was conducted on mean reaction times (RTs). There was no significant main effect of Anxiety Groups, F (1, 56) = 3.11, p = .08, η2p = .05, indicating comparable RTs between GADs (M= 420.97 msec) and HTAs (M = 384.83 msec). However, there was a significant main effect of Trial-Type, F (1.68, 94.32) = 406.32, p < .001, η2p = .88 (Greenhouse-Geiser corrected). A Tukey post-hoc t-test comparison showed that, AY trials (M = 545.70 msec) were slower than AX (M = 392 msec), BX (M = 337.08 msec), and BY trials (M = 336.31 msec), all ps < .001). AX trials were slower than BX trials, t (56) = 7.45, p < .001, and BY trials, t (56) = 8.57, p < 0.001. However, RTs for BX and BY trials were comparable, t (56) = 0.26, p = .99 (Refer to Table 3, Figure 3).
   120→A significant interaction between Anxiety Group x Trial-Type was also observed, F (1.68, 94.32) = 3.19, p = .05, η2p = .054. The GAD participants were slower on AY trials (576.75 msec) compared to the HTA participants (514.63 msec), t (56) = 3.17, p < 0.001.
   121→Table 3: Descriptive statistics for AX CPT task as a function of type of anxiety (GAD and HTAs). 
   122→ 
   123→Note: RTs values here are represented in milliseconds, while errors presented as % of incorrect trials in the task. Values in parentheses are the standard deviations. Here AX, AY, BX and BY are the trial types. A cue d’, A cue C, X probe d’ and X probe C are the signal detection parameters computed in the task. PBIRT: PBI calculated on RTs. PBIERR: PBI calculated on errors. 
   124→Error rates
   125→A significant main effect of anxiety Group on error rates, F (1, 56) = 7.34, p = .009, η2p = .116, was observed. Tukey’s post hoc test confirmed that GADs (M = 13.40%) committed more errors than HTAs (M = 9.26%) in the task, t (56) = 2.71, p = .009. A significant main effect of trial type over error rates was also observed, F (1.10, 61.61) = 131.45, p < .001, η2p = .701 (Greenhouse-Geisser corrected). The Tukey post hoc comparisons revealed that participants committed most errors on AY trials compared to AX, BX, and BY trials. AY (M = 31.50%) compared to AX (M = 4.47%), BX (M = 6.25%), and BY (M = 3.16%), all ps < .001. AX trials have significantly lower error rates than BX trials, t (56) = -3.81, p = .002, but greater error rates than BY trials, t (56) = 4.10, p < .001. Also, BX trials have more errors than BY trials, t (56) = 5.37, p < 0.001(Refer to Table 3, Figure 3). However, the interaction between Anxiety Group x Trial Type for error rates was not significant, F (1.10, 61.61) = 1.55, p = .22, η2p = .027.
   126→Figure 3: Performance of Anxiety groups (HTAs and GADs) in AX-CPT task as a function of Reaction Times (Panel A) and Error Rates (Panel B). The overall mean RTs between the groups didn’t differ as a function of anxiety; GADs were significantly slower than HTAs on AY trials. GADs had an overall higher mean error rate than HTAs in the task, while AY trials had the highest mean error rate among other trials, irrespective of anxiety groups. Error bars are represented as the standard error of the mean.
   127→5.3.3 Signal Detection Parameters
   128→A two-tailed independent sample t-test examined the difference between HTAs and GADs for the A-cue and X-probe indexes. These measures will provide a mechanism of control for both anxiety groups.
   129→A cue Index
   130→Sensitivity and Response Bias to A-Cues as a Function of Trait Anxiety
   131→In terms of sensitivity to the A cues (A cue d'), there was a significant difference between the two groups. A lower A cue d' values were found for GADs (M = 2.05) compared to the HTAs (M = 2.75), t (56) = -2.97, p = .004, d = -.781. However, the two groups were comparable in their biases for A-cues (A-cue C), GAD (M = -0.63) and HTAs (M = -0.69), t (56) = 0.857, p = .39, d = .22. Reduced sensitivity in GADs (low A cue d'; due to high AX hits and high AY misses) might imply top-down control (proactive control) in GADs based on the A cue. In contrast, the groups have no differences in their biases towards responding based on A cue (Refer to Table 3).
   132→X probe Index
   133→Sensitivity and Response Bias to X-Probes as a Function of Trait Anxiety
   134→For the X probe d', too, the GAD (M = 3.14) showed a lower sensitivity as compared to HTAs (M = 3.86), t (56) = -3.87, p = .001, d = -1.109. In contrast, no such differences were observed between the groups for X- probe C, GAD (M = -0.09) and HTA (M= -0.11), t (56) = .44, p = .65, d = .11. High sensitivity for X probes in HTAs indicative of utilization of the cue information to make a response, suggesting that they could discriminate between the given context based on the cue’s information (Refer to Table 3).
   135→Proactive Behavior Index
   136→No significant differences were observed between the two groups for the Proactive Behavior Index calculated based on reaction times (PBIRT) or error rates (PBIERR). For the PBIRT, t (56) = 0.726, p = 0.471, and PBIERR,  t (56) = -1.075, p = 0.28.
   137→Discussion 2  
   138→The second study examined whether participants with GAD differed from HTA participants in their recruitment of cognitive control during the AX-CPT. GAD participants showed poorer performance effectiveness, reflected in higher overall error rates than HTA participants, which is consistent with evidence that GAD is associated with more severe cognitive control impairment than high trait anxiety and with prolonged responding and increased errors in conflict tasks (Yu et al., 2018). Because AX-CPT performance depends on the representation and maintenance of contextual information, broadly elevated errors can plausibly reflect reduced quality of cue-based context maintenance rather than a deficit limited to a single trial type (Braver, 2012; Lenartowicz et al., 2010).
   139→GAD participants also showed slower response times (RT), particularly on AY trials. In the AX-CPT, AY trials specifically place specific demands on expectancy-based preparation because an A cue creates an expectation of an upcoming X probe, whereas a subsequent Y probe requires participants to quickly revise that prepared response (Braver, 2012; Filippi et al., 2022). Thus, although proactive control can improve performance on BX trials, it may come at a cost on AY trials when cue-based expectancies are invalid.  Slower response on AY trials is therefore consistent with greater interference from expectancy-driven preparation and the additional demands of resolving this conflict (Braver, 2012; Shen et al., 2025). This finding also aligns with broader accounts suggesting that anxiety can alter control strategy by reducing processing efficiency, especially in situations that require maintaining goal-relevant information while flexible updating responses (Derakshan & Eysenck, 2009; Eysenck et al., 2007; Y. Yang et al., 2018).
   140→Signal-detection theory (SDT) results provide a more specific account of this impairment. GAD participants showed lower A-cue d′ than HTA participants but comparable A-cue C, suggesting that both groups adopted a similar response criterion toward cue-based preparation while differing in the precision of the contextual representations supporting that preparation. This interpretation is consistent with the Dual Mechanisms of Control (DMC) framework, which proposes that proactive control relies on maintaining goal-relevant contextual information before the probe appears (Braver, 2012). It also aligns with evidence suggesting that anxiety may reduce the efficiency of goal-directed attention and working-memory-based control, without necessarily eliminating strategic engagement altogether (Eysenck et al., 2007; Eysenck & Derakshan, 2011).
   141→A similar pattern was observed at the probe stage. Lower X-probe d′ in GAD participants suggests reduced efficiency in maintaining and applying cue information across the cue–probe interval, making it difficult to distinguish valid target responses from misleading probes (Y. Yang et al., 2018). The absence of group differences in X-probe C further suggests that this difficulty is more likely due to weaker maintenance of contextual information rather than a generalized response bias. This interpretation is supported by findings showing reduced sustained lateral prefrontal activity, greater reliance on reactive processing, and weaker dorsolateral prefrontal engagement in GAD during tasks requiring cognitive control (Braver, 2012; Yu et al., 2018).
   142→The absence of group differences in PBI further suggests that broader behavioral indices may not fully capture the nature of cognitive control impairment in anxiety. PBI (Proactive Bias Index) reflects an individual's overall tendency toward proactive versus reactive control by combining seed and accuracy across different trial types. However, because it integrates these performance tradeoffs into a single measure and lacks trial-level sensitivity, it may overlook subtle deficits in the quality of contextual representations that SDT measures, such as d′ and C, can capture more directly. AX-CPT measures can index the overall balance between proactive and reactive strategies, but broader work shows that cognitive control also depends on the quality of context updating, preparation, and maintenance processes that such summary scores may not isolate well (Gonthier et al., 2016; Lenartowicz et al., 2010). The present findings, therefore, suggest that GAD and HTA may differ less in whether proactive control is engaged and more in how effectively and accurately contextual information is represented to support that control.
   143→However, this interpretation should be considered with caution, as findings in the broader literature remain mixed across different populations, tasks, and contexts. For example, anxiety in youth has been associated with reduced planful, proactive behavior, especially in younger children (Filippi et al., 2022). Similarly, state anxiety has been associated with impairments in proactive control, while reactive control may be enhanced in some cases (Y. Yang et al., 2018). Proactive control deficits have also been reported in social anxiety and test anxiety, although findings related to reactive control are less consistent across paradigms (Z. Wang et al., 2025; Zhao et al., 2024). However, some researchers have found that cold cognitive performance remains normal in GAD outside situations involving threats or high cognitive load, and others have found that control over negative distracters is improved in affective settings (Hallion et al., 2019; Leonard & Abramovitch, 2019).
   144→Extending the DMC framework to a neutral AX-CPT context, the present findings suggest that GAD is characterized by a less efficient and less precise implementation of proactive control than HTA, rather than by a wholesale absence of proactive orientation. Overall, the HTA–GAD distinction appears to reflect both quantitative and qualitative differences in control: quantitatively, GAD participants showed poorer performance; qualitatively, they appeared to maintain a similar strategic orientation but with reduced representational fidelity supporting efficient cue-based control (Braver, 2012; Lara & Wallis, 2015; Yu et al., 2018).
   145→
   146→General Discussion
   147→The present findings suggest that trait anxiety and generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) not only differ in terms of quantitative efficiency, but also in the qualitative organization of cognitive control and context processing (Sharp et al., 2015). In both studies, high trait anxious were characterized by changes in their strategic biasing toward highly predictive contextual cues while keeping overall contextual sensitivity and task performance intact. In contrast, GAD was marked by reduced contextual fidelity, weaker maintenance of contextual information, and less stable contextual updating. These results suggest that pathological anxiety does not simply reflect a more severe form of impediment in cognitive control associated with trait-anxiety (Barlow, 2002), but may instead involve a qualitatively altered pattern of control implementation in which strategic orientation is preserved while representational precision is degraded.
   148→By distinguishing between low, medium, and high trait anxiety, we gained insight into the relationship between anxiety and cognitive control. Notably, the pattern did not follow a linear trajectory; the pattern suggested that differences between low- and medium-trait anxiety participants primarily reflected variation in proactive engagement, whereas HTA participants showed a more distinct control profile. Indeed, HTAs had stronger expectancy biases based on cues while showing an ability to discriminate the context and perform efficiently. The results indicate that increased trait anxiety might affect how strategically relevant contextual information is weighted without being inefficient. By taking into account the data from both HTA and GAD groups, it became clear that GAD participants had noisy context representations, resulting in impaired goal maintenance and control efficiency. Indeed, HTA participants showed stronger cue-based expectancy biases while maintaining preserved contextual discrimination and relatively intact performance. This pattern suggests that elevated trait anxiety may influence how contextual information is strategically weighted, without necessarily reducing efficiency. When GAD was examined alongside HTA, the distinction became clearer. The GAD participants showed less stable or noisier contextual representations, which may have weakened goal maintenance and reduced control efficiency. Together, these findings argue against the idea that anxiety-related changes in the simple severity continuum and instead suggest partially distinct patterns of control engagement and disruption. 
   149→A key contribution of the present work is the dissociation between strategic orientation and representational fidelity revealed by the signal detection measures (Barch et al., 2004; Hautus et al., 2021). Cue-related indices mainly captured preparation based on expectancy and strategic use of highly predictive cue–probe relationships (Cohen et al., 1999; Braver et al., 2001). However, probe-related indices reflected how effectively cue information was maintained, integrated, and used during response selection(Barch et al., 2003; Braver, 2012). The finding that GAD participants showed comparable response biases despite reduced contextual discriminability suggests that strategic readiness may remain relatively intact even when the underlying representations supporting that readiness are less stable and less precise. By comparison, HTAs showed altered expectancy-based strategic biasing while preserving contextual sensitivity, suggesting a different balance between cue-based preparation and probe-level adjustment.
   150→These findings refine dual-mechanism accounts of control by suggesting that anxiety-related difficulties may involve more than a generalized reduction in control strength. Instead, they involve differences in how contextual information is strategically weighted, maintained, and deployed across changing task demands (Braver, 2012; Shenhav et al., 2013). Consistent with Attentional Control Theory, anxiety appeared to affect the efficiency of goal-directed control processes rather than their complete engagement (Eysenck et al., 2007). HTA participants showed changes in strategic biasing while maintaining relatively intact contextual implementation, whereas GAD participants exhibited preserved cue-based preparatory orientation but reduced contextual precision and flexibility. 
   151→The present findings also highlight the value of the AX-CPT as a potential paradigm for disentangling different components of cognitive control. By incorporating cue-based and probe-based contingencies within the same task, the AX-CPT enabled the present experiments to distinguish strategic preparation based on cue-based from probe-level contextual updating and response adjustment. Although traditional behavioral measures, RT and accuracy, did not always clearly distinguish between the anxiety groups, signal detection indices revealed more subtle differences in cue sensitivity, response bias, and contextual discrimination. Overall, the findings suggest that understanding cognitive control may require looking beyond composite behavioral measures and considering how control emerges through processes such as expectancy formation, context maintenance, and flexible response adjustment.
   152→
   153→Limitations and Future Directions
   154→Certain limitations of the present study should be acknowledged. First, although depressive symptoms were measured in Experiment 1b, they were not examined further in the current analyses. Future research should test whether they contribute independently to the observed patterns of cognitive control. Second, the present inferences are based primarily on AX-CPT performance and signal detection measures. Future studies could employ computational modeling, probabilistic learning tasks, or working-memory manipulations to better distinguish contextual maintenance from learned cue–outcome expectancies. Such approaches may also help clarify whether the strategic biasing seen in HTA reflects compensatory learning processes, while the more rigid patterns in GAD reflect reduced flexibility in updating contextual associations. Third, although the use of neutral AX-CPT was intentional, it may have limited sensitivity to anxiety-related effects that become more evident in emotionally salient contexts. Neutral AX-CPT was employed to test the impact of levels of anxiety and clinical anxiety on cognitive control-related vulnerability, avoiding the interaction between the valence of emotional stimuli and control. Finally, the cross-sectional design cannot determine whether the HTA profile reflects a stable compensatory phenotype or a developmental pathway toward clinical anxiety.
   155→Overall, the findings suggest that anxiety-related differences in cognitive control may be understood less as simple reductions in overall control capacity and much better in terms of contextual precision, strategic biasing, and representational fidelity. Clinically, the distinction between preserved strategic orientation in HTA and weaker contextual implementation in GAD may help explain why some highly anxious individuals continue to function relatively effectively, whereas others develop rigid responding. These findings further suggest that interventions for clinical anxiety may benefit from strengthening contextual updating and improving flexibility in adjusting expectancy to changing situations.
   156→
   157→References
   158→Abrahamse, E., Braem, S., Notebaert, W., & Verguts, T. (2016). Grounding cognitive control in associative learning. Psychological Bulletin, 142(7), 693–728. https://doi.org/10.1037/bul0000047
   159→Alzahabi, R., Hussey, E., & Ward, N. (2022). The influence of context representations on cognitive control states. Cognitive Research: Principles and Implications, 7(1), 93. https://doi.org/10.1186/s41235-022-00443-0
   160→Ansari, T. L., & Derakshan, N. (2011). The neural correlates of impaired inhibitory control in anxiety. Neuropsychologia, 49(5), 1146–1153. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2011.01.019
   161→Barch, D. M., Carter, C. S., MacDonald, A. W., Braver, T. S., & Cohen, J. D. (2003). Context-processing deficits in schizophrenia: Diagnostic specificity, 4-week course, and relationships to clinical symptoms. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 112(1), 132–143. https://doi.org/10.1037/0021-843X.112.1.132
   162→Barch, D. M., Mitropoulou, V., Harvey, P. D., New, A. S., Silverman, J. M., & Siever, L. J. (2004). Context-Processing Deficits in Schizotypal Personality Disorder. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 113(4), 556–568. https://doi.org/10.1037/0021-843X.113.4.556
   163→Barlow, D. H., Raffa, S. D., & Cohen, E. M. (2002). Psychosocial treatments for panic disorders, phobias, and generalized anxiety disorder. A guide to treatments that work, 2, 301-336.
   164→Basten, U., Stelzel, C., & Fiebach, C. J. (2011). Trait Anxiety Modulates the Neural Efficiency of Inhibitory Control. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 23(10), 3132–3145. https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn_a_00003
   165→Beck, A. T., Steer, R. A., Ball, R., & Ranieri, W. F. (1996). Comparison of Beck Depression Inventories-IA and-II in Psychiatric Outpatients. Journal of Personality Assessment, 67(3), 588–597. https://doi.org/10.1207/s15327752jpa6703_13
   166→Berggren, N., & Derakshan, N. (2013). Attentional control deficits in trait anxiety: Why you see them and why you don’t. Biological Psychology, 92(3), 440–446. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsycho.2012.03.007
   167→Berggren, N., & Derakshan, N. (2014). Inhibitory deficits in trait anxiety: Increased stimulus-based or response-based interference? Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 21(5), 1339–1345. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13423-014-0611-8
   168→Bishop, S. J. (2009). Trait anxiety and impoverished prefrontal control of attention. Nature Neuroscience, 12(1), 92–98. https://doi.org/10.1038/nn.2242
   169→Braver, T. S. (2012). The variable nature of cognitive control: A dual mechanisms framework. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 16(2), 106–113. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2011.12.010
   170→Braver, T. S., Barch, D. M., Keys, B. A., Carter, C. S., Cohen, J. D., Kaye, J. A., ... & Reed, B. R. (2001). Context processing in older adults: evidence for a theory relating cognitive control to neurobiology in healthy aging. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 130(4), 746.
   171→Braver, T. S., Paxton, J. L., Locke, H. S., & Barch, D. M. (2009). Flexible neural mechanisms of cognitive control within human prefrontal cortex. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 106(18), 7351–7356. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0808187106
   172→Cavanagh, J. F., Meyer, A., & Hajcak, G. (2017). Error-Specific Cognitive Control Alterations in Generalized Anxiety Disorder. Biological Psychiatry: Cognitive Neuroscience and Neuroimaging, 2(5), 413–420. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bpsc.2017.01.004
   173→Chiew, K. S., Stanek, J. K., & Adcock, R. A. (2016). Reward Anticipation Dynamics during Cognitive Control and Episodic Encoding: Implications for Dopamine. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 10. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2016.00555
   174→Cohen, J. D., Barch, D. M., Carter, C., & Servan-Schreiber, D. (1999). Context-processing deficits in schizophrenia: converging evidence from three theoretically motivated cognitive tasks. Journal of abnormal psychology, 108(1), 120.
   175→
   176→Derakshan, N., & Eysenck, M. W. (2009). Anxiety, Processing Efficiency, and Cognitive Performance: New Developments from Attentional Control Theory. European Psychologist, 14(2), 168–176. https://doi.org/10.1027/1016-9040.14.2.168
   177→Edwards, B. G. . (2010). Improving prefrontal cortex function in schizophrenia through focused training of cognitive control. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2010.00032
   178→Eysenck, M. W., & Derakshan, N. (2011). New perspectives in attentional control theory. Personality and Individual Differences, 50(7), 955–960. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.paid.2010.08.019
   179→Eysenck, M. W., Derakshan, N., Santos, R., & Calvo, M. G. (2007). Anxiety and cognitive performance: Attentional control theory. Emotion, 7(2), 336–353. https://doi.org/10.1037/1528-3542.7.2.336
   180→Fales, C. L., Barch, D. M., Burgess, G. C., Schaefer, A., Mennin, D. S., Gray, J. R., & Braver, T. S. (2008). Anxiety and cognitive efficiency: Differential modulation of transient and sustained neural activity during a working memory task. Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience, 8(3), 239–253. https://doi.org/10.3758/CABN.8.3.239
   181→Faul, F., Erdfelder, E., Lang, A.-G., & Buchner, A. (2007). G*Power 3: A flexible statistical power analysis program for the social, behavioral, and biomedical sciences. Behavior Research Methods, 39(2), 175–191. https://doi.org/10.3758/BF03193146
   182→Filippi, C. A., Subar, A., Ravi, S., Haas, S., Troller-Renfree, S. V., Fox, N. A., Leibenluft, E., & Pine, D. S. (2022). Developmental Changes in the Association Between Cognitive Control and Anxiety. Child Psychiatry & Human Development, 53(3), 599–609. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10578-021-01150-5
   183→Fröber, K., & Dreisbach, G. (2012). How Positive Affect Modulates Proactive Control: Reduced Usage of Informative Cues Under Positive Affect with Low Arousal. Frontiers in Psychology, 3. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2012.00265
   184→Gonthier, C., Macnamara, B. N., Chow, M., Conway, A. R. A., & Braver, T. S. (2016). Inducing Proactive Control Shifts in the AX-CPT. Frontiers in Psychology, 7. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2016.01822
   185→Hallion, L. S., Tolin, D. F., Assaf, M., Goethe, J., & Diefenbach, G. J. (2017). Cognitive Control in Generalized Anxiety Disorder: Relation of Inhibition Impairments to Worry and Anxiety Severity. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 41(4), 610–618. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10608-017-9832-2
   186→Hallion, L. S., Tolin, D. F., & Diefenbach, G. J. (2019). Enhanced cognitive control over task-irrelevant emotional distractors in generalized anxiety disorder versus obsessive-compulsive disorder. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 64, 71–78. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.janxdis.2019.02.004
   187→Han, Y., Yan, H., Shan, X., Li, H., Liu, F., Li, P., Zhao, J., & Guo, W. (2023). Disrupted functional connectivity associated with cognitive impairment in generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) and comorbid GAD and depression: A follow-up fMRI study. Journal of Psychiatry and Neuroscience, 48(6), E439–E451. https://doi.org/10.1503/jpn.230091
   188→Hautus, M. J. (1995). Corrections for extreme proportions and their biasing effects on estimated values ofd′. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers, 27(1), 46–51. https://doi.org/10.3758/BF03203619
   189→Hautus, M. J., Macmillan, N. A., & Creelman, C. D. (2021). Detection theory: A user's guide. Routledge.
   190→Holtmann, J., Herbort, M. C., Wüstenberg, T., Soch, J., Richter, S., Walter, H., Roepke, S., & Schott, B. H. (2013). Trait anxiety modulates fronto-limbic processing of emotional interference in borderline personality disorder. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 7. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2013.00054
   191→Irlbacher, K., Kraft, A., Kehrer, S., & Brandt, S. A. (2014). Mechanisms and neuronal networks involved in reactive and proactive cognitive control of interference in working memory. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 46, 58–70. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2014.06.014
   192→Koch, I., & Allport, A. (2006). Cue-based preparation and stimulus-based priming of tasks in task switching. Memory & Cognition, 34(2), 433–444. https://doi.org/10.3758/BF03193420
   193→Krug, M. K., & Carter, C. S. (2010). Adding fear to conflict: A general purpose cognitive control network is modulated by trait anxiety. Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience, 10(3), 357–371. https://doi.org/10.3758/CABN.10.3.357
   194→Krug, M. K., & Carter, C. S. (2012). Proactive and reactive control during emotional interference and its relationship to trait anxiety. Brain Research, 1481, 13–36. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brainres.2012.08.045
   195→Kubota, M., Hadley, L. V., Schaeffner, S., Könen, T., Meaney, J.-A., Auyeung, B., Morey, C. C., Karbach, J., & Chevalier, N. (2020). Consistent use of proactive control and relation with academic achievement in childhood. Cognition, 203, 104329. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2020.104329
   196→Kushwaha, J. K. (n.d.). Beck Depression Inventory: Hindi Translation and Psychometric Properties for the Students of Higher Education.
   197→Lara, A. H., & Wallis, J. D. (2015). The Role of Prefrontal Cortex in Working Memory: A Mini Review. Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience, 9. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnsys.2015.00173
   198→Larson, M. J., Clawson, A., Clayson, P. E., & Baldwin, S. A. (2013). Cognitive conflict adaptation in generalized anxiety disorder. Biological Psychology, 94(2), 408–418. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsycho.2013.08.006
   199→Lenartowicz, A., Escobedo-Quiroz, R., & Cohen, J. D. (2010). Updating of context in working memory: An event-related potential study. Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience, 10(2), 298–315. https://doi.org/10.3758/CABN.10.2.298
   200→Leonard, K., & Abramovitch, A. (2019). Cognitive functions in young adults with generalized anxiety disorder. European Psychiatry, 56(1), 1–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eurpsy.2018.10.008

[showing lines 1-200 of 238; use offset=201 with limit to continue reading]