     1→
     2→
     3→Title: Emotional and physical abuse have dissociable impacts on punishment learning and task engagement during adolescence
     4→
     5→Authors:  Holly Sullivan-Toole1,2, Jeremy Haynes3, John McClellan France1,2, Suzanne C. Perkins4, Monica Luciana5, Bart Larsen1,2 & Thomas M. Olino6
     6→
     7→
     8→Department of Pediatrics, Masonic Institute for the Developing Brain, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, 55455, United States 
     9→Masonic Institute for the Developing Brain, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, 55455, United States
    10→Department of Psychology, Georgia Southern University, Statesboro, GA, 30460, United States
    11→University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, 48109, United States
    12→Department of Psychology, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, 55455, United States 
    13→Psychology and Neuroscience Department, Temple University, 1701 N. 13th Street, Philadelphia, PA 19122, USA     
    14→
    15→
    16→
    17→Correspondence: Holly Sullivan-Toole, PhD, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA. Email: htoole@umn.edu
    18→
    19→
    20→
    21→
    22→
    23→
    24→
    25→
    26→
    27→
    28→
    29→
    30→
    31→
    32→
    33→
    34→
    35→
    36→
    37→
    38→
    39→
    40→
    41→
    42→
    43→
    44→
    45→
    46→
    47→Abstract
    48→
    49→Childhood adversity is a robust risk factor for psychopathology, and growing evidence implicates developmental alterations in reward and punishment learning as potent mechanisms shaping this vulnerability. However, little is known about how specific types of adversity impact different learning processes, particularly during the sensitive adolescent period. To examine effects of different types of adversity on the development of valenced learning processes, we combined a subtype-specific approach to childhood adversity, a behavioral task and reinforcement learning (RL) model that capture distinct component processes of learning, and a longitudinal design in youth aged 9-17 (n = 166). Task performance metrics included traditional summary scores and RL-derived estimates for reward learning rate, punishment learning rate, win/loss frequency sensitivity, and go bias (general tendency to play). Analyses probing adversity subtypes and component learning processes revealed dissociable effects:  emotional abuse attenuated normative developmental increases in punishment learning rate, and physical abuse attenuated normative increases in both go bias and a summary score of reward learning (FDR < .05). In contrast, analyses relying on a gross summary score of net success and composite variables representing broad adversity dimensions (abuse vs. neglect) obscured these effects, highlighting the need for fine-grained characterization of both adversity and learning processes. Additionally, adversity did not predict differences in net success, suggesting that youth high and low in adversity reach similar behavioral outcomes through divergent learning strategies. This study is among the first to identify unique effects of different adversity types on specific component processes of valenced learning during adolescence.  
    50→
    51→
    52→Keywords: childhood adversity, childhood trauma, abuse, neglect, adolescent development, reward learning, reinforcement learning, adolescence, learning rate, Iowa Gambling Task
    53→
    54→
    55→
    56→Introduction
    57→
    58→Childhood adversity is a robust risk factor for a range of psychiatric problems, with 30% or more of the risk for disorders attributable to early adversity 1–4. Increasingly, abnormalities in reward and punishment learning have been implicated as key factors linking childhood adversity to psychopathology 5–9. A reinforcement learning framework can offer insight into specific learning mechanisms by which early experiences may give rise to vulnerability for psychopathology 10–13. Adolescence is likely a sensitive period for these effects, as the neural circuitry supporting reward and punishment processing undergoes substantial maturation during this window 14–17. However, in order to identify how specific types of adversity shape different learning mechanisms, it is critical to isolate distinct processes and track their development over time. Here, we combine a subtype-specific approach to childhood adversity, a behavioral task and reinforcement learning model that capture distinct components of learning, and a longitudinal design — together offering a fine-grained characterization of the pathways by which different adversities influence the development of valenced learning processes during adolescence.
    59→Childhood adversity is increasingly conceptualized using a dimensional framework, whereby different dimensions of adversity (e.g., threat vs. deprivation) influence the development of different neurobehavioral systems that confer risk for psychopathology18,19. The seminal dimensional model of adversity and psychopathology proposed that deprivation (e.g., neglect) confers risk via developmental alterations in the cognitive and executive function systems, whereas threat-related adversity (e.g., abuse) confers risk via developmental alterations in emotion processing and threat-detection systems 15,20, and this model has found broad empirical support 21–25 (but see also 26). However, abuse and neglect are heterogenous constructs, and evidence also supports dissociable effects for different subtypes of abuse and neglect (e.g., emotional vs. physical abuse) 27–30. Thus, evidence demonstrates that adversity's effects vary across both broad dimensions (e.g., abuse vs. neglect) and between subtypes (e.g., emotional vs. physical abuse). While substantial research has examined effects on cognitive and emotional systems, far less is known about how adversity impacts other candidate systems thought to shape long-term outcomes, including those supporting reward and punishment learning 5,31. 
    60→Learning from rewards and punishments is complex and subserved by partially dissociable neurobehavioral systems 32–35, often conceptualized as the Positive and Negative Valence Systems 36, respectively. These systems have emerged as important, but relatively understudied, systems in the context of childhood adversity  5,31. The Positive Valence Systems, which support multiple facets of reward processing, are increasingly recognized as a candidate neurobehavioral system(s) impacted by childhood adversity 7,9,31, with robust cross-species evidence demonstrating that different types of early adversity impact a range of reward processes 7–9,37,38. Notably, emerging evidence suggests early adversity exerts more robust effects on reward learning than on other reward responsivity measures 8,9. There is also evidence that adversity affects the processing of negatively valenced stimuli — primarily coming from studies demonstrating that threat-related adversity (e.g., abuse) is associated with altered processing of primary punishments such as electric shock, and altered processing of negatively valenced social cues such as angry faces 7,39,22. Additionally, different types of early adversity have also been linked to altered processing of secondary punishments such as monetary losses 40–42, which engages neural circuitry that substantially overlaps with that involved in processing primary punishments 35. Together, these findings suggest that multiple types of adversity exert widespread effects on both the Positive and Negative Valence Systems, with emerging evidence suggesting pronounced effects on learning from valenced outcomes7.
    61→Despite accumulating evidence that the Positive and Negative Valence Systems — and valenced learning specifically — represent key mechanisms that link adversity to psychopathology, several gaps limit insight into these pathways. First, most learning studies examine a single type of adversity or aggregate across different types of adversity within a dimension (e.g., collapsing multiple types of abuse), obscuring whether different subtypes of abuse or neglect exert dissociable effects on valenced learning. Second, research examining effects of adversity on learning has generally relied on gross summary scores that measure observable learning outcomes (e.g., proportion of trials on which a higher-reward option was selected), rather than measures that isolate specific underlying learning processes. Reinforcement learning (RL) modelling offers mechanistic insight into the processes underlying valenced learning by decomposing observable learning behavior into multiple latent components (e.g., reward versus punishment learning rates). Recently, research has demonstrated that different RL components have distinct developmental trajectories across adolescence and that the development of RL components is influenced by clinical risk factors 38,43,44, highlighting the importance of characterizing effects of childhood adversity on distinct learning processes. Further, RL sits at the intersection of emotional and cognitive/executive processing, integrating implicit, emotion-laden value representations with higher-order processes like working memory and cognitive control 45,46. Given that threat and deprivation are, respectively, associated with alterations in emotion and cognitive/executive systems 15,20 — systems that RL recruits — both abuse and neglect may impact valenced learning, though potentially through different mechanisms. Yet, these effects have only recently become a focus of inquiry 47–51. Third, while most developmental RL work has relied on cross-sectional samples 52,53, longitudinal designs are needed to clarify how adversity shapes developmental learning trajectories in ways that may confer risk for psychopathology 31,54. 
    62→To test how childhood adversity shapes valenced learning trajectories, we used the Play‐or‐Pass Iowa Gambling Task (PoP-IGT) 55–57 administered up to five times in youth aged 9-17. The PoP-IGT is well-suited for examining differences in valenced learning as the task can be leveraged to provide multiple measures related to reward and punishment learning. Traditional summary scores from the PoP-IGT dissociate learning from reward and learning from punishment as well as providing a measure of overall good performance58. Further, to interrogate component learning processes, we applied an RL model that our group developed for the PoP-IGT 58, which decomposes task behavior into reward learning rate, punishment learning rate, sensitivity to the frequency of rewards/losses, and task engagement (go bias). We examined how traditional summary score metrics and RL-derived metrics develop across adolescence as a function of both dimensional (threat vs. deprivation) and subtype-specific adversity (emotional, physical, and sexual abuse; emotional and physical neglect). Given the emerging nature of this work, all adversity analyses were exploratory, aiming to characterize how different types of adversity relate to specific valenced learning processes during adolescence.
    63→
    64→Method 
    65→Participants. Participants were drawn from the Temple Adolescent Development Study (TADS), a prospective longitudinal study focused on the emergence of psychopathology across adolescence. This study was approved by Temple University’s Institutional Review Board and performed in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. Youth aged 9-14 who spoke English and had at least one biological parent in the home were recruited into the study and assessed across 36 months. Exclusion criteria included a history of bipolar or psychotic spectrum disorders in either the child or parent, as well as child diagnoses of major neurological conditions, significant head injury, learning disabilities, or developmental disabilities (including autism spectrum disorder). At baseline, general cognitive function was assessed using the Kaufman Brief Intelligence Test, Second Edition 59, and individuals with a full-scale IQ below 70 (≥2 SD below the mean) were excluded from participation. Written informed consent was obtained from parents, and youth provided written assent prior to participation. The sub-sample of TADS youth participants who had available PoP-IGT data has been reported on previously 44. The present analyses included data from youth 9-17 years old who completed the PoP-IGT five times, spaced approximately nine months apart (T1 n =166, T2 n =130, T3 n =107, T4 n =71, T5 n =54). At baseline, the sample was comprised of 9-14-year-olds (mean age at baseline = 10.99 (1.48), 57% female youth, and of the 84% of the sample that reported race, 40% were White, 45% were Black, 1% were Asian, 12% were multiracial (with 60% reporting a racial minority status overall). Table 1 provides demographic characteristics and descriptive statistics for the baseline sample, with corresponding statistics for all five timepoints reported in Supplemental Table 1.
    66→[Insert Table 1]
    67→
    68→
    69→
    70→
    71→Table 1. Demographic characteristics and descriptive statistics for the baseline sample. Sample demographics (age, sex, and K-BIT nonverbal IQ) did not differ across levels of total adversity severity as measured by the CTQ. Supplemental Table 1 contains demographic information across all five timepoints. 
    72→
    73→
    74→Childhood Trauma Questionnaire (CTQ). Exposure to childhood adversity was assessed at baseline using the Childhood Trauma Questionnaire (CTQ) Short Form 60, a self-report questionnaire that measures five adversity subtypes: emotional, physical, and sexual abuse, and emotional and physical neglect. Each subscale includes five items each that scored on a 5-point Likert scale ranging from “never true” to “very often true”, such that the maximum score for each subscale is 25. The CTQ also includes a three-item Minimization/Denial scale designed to identify respondents who may underreport or minimize adverse childhood experiences by endorsing highly idealized descriptions of their upbringing. The CTQ has been validated in adolescents 61; however, it should be noted that prior research has recommended caution when using the CTQ with adolescents younger than 14 (our sample was 9-14 at the baseline assessment) due to relatively unstable test-retest reliability before that age 62. In our sample, the CTQ subscales demonstrated acceptable internal consistency for emotional abuse, emotional neglect, physical abuse, and sexual abuse (αs = .70–.76), and, consistent with prior literature 63, the physical neglect subscale showed weaker reliability (α = .46). Using previously normed scores, this sample had modest proportions of cases above the “moderate-to-severe” cutoff scores 64 for each type of adversity: 5.4% of the sample participants exceeded the cutoff for emotional neglect (≥15); 6.6% for emotional abuse (≥13); 6.6% for physical abuse (≥10); 10.8% for physical neglect (≥10); and 3.0% for sexual abuse (≥8); see Table 1. Childhood adversity was operationalized in two ways. Adversity was modeled dimensionally with threat defined as a composite of all abuse subscales (Abuse Composite) and deprivation defined as a composite of all neglect subscales (Neglect Composite). Additionally, we took a subtype-specific approach to operationalizing adversity, examining each of the five CTQ subscales (EA, PA, SA, EN, PN) as separate predictors.
    75→Play‐or‐Pass Iowa Gambling Task (PoP-IGT). The PoP-IGT is a passive avoidance reinforcement learning task55–57 in which participants try to earn money and avoid monetary losses through sampling different “decks of cards” mapped to different payment structures.  The task begins with participants being given a “bank” of $2,000. Four decks of cards are shown on screen and, on each trial, a single deck is presented to the participant, and they are given the opportunity to “play” or “pass” on a card from that deck. If the participant plays on the presented card, they receive a monetary outcome in the form of a gain, loss, or neutral outcome (i.e., $0). If the participant passes on the presented card, they receive no monetary outcome and move onto the next trial. Each deck is associated with a different distribution of monetary outcomes such that, across the task, Decks A and B yield a net loss (i.e., the disadvantageous/bad decks) and Decks C and D yield a net gain (i.e., the advantageous/good decks). The order in which the decks are presented and the sequences of monetary outcomes for each deck were pseudo-randomly fixed across all participants. There were three blocks comprised of 40 trials each. Participants were not given any information about the monetary outcomes associated with each deck but were able to learn about the monetary outcomes associated with each deck through trial-and-error sampling. If the participant did not respond within four seconds, the trial ended and was coded as a ‘pass’ trial. Finally, participants were told that the monetary outcomes were hypothetical but their task earnings would be exchanged for a real cash bonus. Regardless of performance, all participants were given a $10 bonus upon completion of the task.
    76→
    77→Task administration. Two versions of the PoP-IGT with different deck–payout mappings were randomized across administrations to maintain trial-and-error learning and minimize practice effects from deck recognition. The task was primarily administered in-lab using E-Prime Stimulus Presentation Software 65. Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, approximately 1%, 16% and 69% of participants’ data at timepoints 3, 4, and 5, respectively, were collected remotely using PsychoPy and Pavlovia 66,67, and a binary variable reflecting in-lab task administration via E-Prime was included as a covariate in the longitudinal models (see Table 1).
    78→
    79→Covariates. In addition to in-lab task administration covariate, we also controlled for other factors previously shown to affect performance on the IGT including cognitive functioning 56,68–70 and sex 71,72.
    80→Kaufman Brief Intelligence Test (K-BIT) Nonverbal IQ. Youth completed the Kaufman Brief Intelligence Test (K-BIT-2) 59 to assess cognitive function, and the standardized nonverbal IQ score was used as a covariate in the longitudinal models. 
    81→Data analysis. 
    82→Data analysis overview. Across each of the five PoP-IGT assessments, learning metrics were calculated using a traditional summary score approach and a reinforcement learning computational modeling approach. General statistical analyses and multilevel longitudinal modeling were conducted in R (v. 4.5.2) 73.  The reinforcement learning model, the PoP-ORL model (detailed below), was implemented using hierarchical Bayesian analysis (HBA) computed in Stan (v. 2.36.0) 74, which employs Hamiltonian Monte Carlo, a variant of Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC), for sampling from high-dimensional probabilistic models. To interface between R and Stan, we used the Cmdstan package (v. 2.36.0) 75. 
    83→
    84→Computing PoP-IGT traditional summary scores. Three gross measures of learning were computed separately from data at each assessment timepoint, and each of these three traditional summary scores were used as outcome variables in the multilevel longitudinal models. ‘Good Deck Proportion’ was computed as the proportion of plays on advantageous decks and served as a measure of reward learning, and ‘Bad Deck Proportion’ was computed as the proportion of plays on disadvantageous decks and served as a measure of punishment learning. Additionally, ‘Net Performance’, computed as the proportion of plays from good decks relative to bad decks, served as a gross measure of overall good decision making on the task. 
    85→
    86→Computing PoP-IGT reinforcement learning metrics. Four reinforcement learning (RL) metrics were derived from the Play-or-Pass Outcome-Representation Learning (PoP-ORL) model 58 and used as outcome variables in the multilevel longitudinal models. Extending the Outcome-Representation Learning model 76, which was developed for the standard IGT, the PoP-ORL model is a hierarchical Bayesian reinforcement learning model designed by Haynes and colleagues 58 to specifically dissociate mechanisms underlying choice behavior in the PoP-IGT. The PoP-ORL estimates the following four free parameters that served as the primary RL metrics: ‘Reward Learning Rate’ (Arew), which describes the speed of updating value estimates in response to a gain, ‘Punishment Learning Rate’ (Apun), which describes the speed of updating value estimates in response to a loss, ‘Win/Loss Frequency Sensitivity’ (βf), which describes how sensitive updating value estimates is in response to the frequency of rewards/losses while ignoring reward magnitude, and ‘Go Bias’ (βb), which describes a general tendency to play (rather than pass) across all decks. The PoP-ORL was fit separately to the data from each timepoint, yielding posterior distributions for each of the free parameters. Posterior means for each of these four free parameters were extracted for each individual participant for each of the five timepoints. As the PoP-ORL model estimates learning rates that are bounded between 0 and 1, the Arew and Apun parameter means were normalized per the inverse cumulative distribution function of the standard normal distribution (i.e. the `qnorm` function in R) before being used as outcome variables. Additionally, ‘Overall Learning Rate’ (Arew + Apun) was computed by summing the normalized posterior means for Reward and Punishment Learning Rates, and this metric along with the posterior means from the four free parameters were used as outcome variables in the multilevel longitudinal models.
    87→
    88→Summary of the PoP-ORL model. See 58 for full model details. To summarize the PoP-ORL model, choices to play or pass are modeled as a function of the value of playing on a given deck using the following logistic function:  
    89→
    90→
    91→
    92→where indicates whether the participant played (= 1) versus passed (= 0) when presented with deck j on trial t. While the value of passing is held constant at 0, the value of playing is updated such that the expected value (EV), expected frequency (EF), and a bias for playing (βb) are integrated linearly to generate a value signal for each deck j on trial t, as follows: 
    93→
    94→βf + 
    95→
    96→The four free parameters that inform this value signal are summarized in Table 2. 
    97→
    98→
    99→
   100→
   101→[Insert Table 2]
   102→
   103→
   104→
   105→
   106→
   107→Table 2. Summary of the PoP-ORL model parameters. Trial-by-trial deck value signals are informed by four free parameters: Reward Learning Rate, Punishment Learning Rate, Win/Loss Frequency Sensitivity, and Go Bias. See Haynes and colleagues 58 for full model details. 
   108→
   109→
   110→PoP-ORL model validation. Model validation including both parameter recovery and posterior predictive checks for this model in this sample was previously conducted and reported 44. Parameter recovery was generally in the good-to-excellent range across the timepoints for all parameters except for Arew where parameter recovery correlations were in the range of .59-.67, and posterior predicative checks demonstrated that the model-simulated data was a good fit to observed data (see 44 Supplemental Figures 1 and 3). 
   111→Examining learning metric developmental trajectories. To characterize developmental change in learning metrics, the three summary score metrics and five RL-derived metrics (four model parameters plus Overall Learning Rate) from each of the five timepoints were analyzed via a series of multilevel models, using the lme4 package 77. Models were estimated using restricted maximum likelihood (REML), and nested models were compared using likelihood ratio tests. In all models, age was treated as a continuous, time-varying predictor and centered at 10.99 years, the mean age at baseline. Accordingly, ‘baseline effects’ refer to between-group differences at this reference age, whereas ‘age-related effects’ or ‘trajectories’ reflect the rate of change over time (i.e., linear and/or quadratic slopes). For each of the eight learning metrics, a pre-specified four-step sequence of nested models was fit. Model 1 estimated unconditional linear change across age. Model 2 extended Model 1, adding a quadratic age term to accommodate nonlinear trajectories. Both unconditional models included subject-level random intercepts and random age slopes. The two functional forms were compared by likelihood ratio test, and the quadratic term was retained only when it produced a significant improvement in fit (p < .05); the winning growth shape then served as the base model for the conditional models. This model-selection step was used solely to determine the underlying developmental trajectory (linear vs. quadratic age effects). All subsequent covariates and adversity predictors were specified a priori and were retained in Models 3 and 4 regardless of their individual contribution to model fit. Model 3 introduced three pre-specified covariates—child sex, K-BIT nonverbal IQ, and task administration modality (in-lab E-Prime vs. remote Pavlovia). Model 4 extended Model 3 by incorporating the childhood adversity variables, such that each adversity variable was entered into its own independent Model 4 (i.e., each abuse or neglect variable was interrogated in a separate model). Adversity was examined using two complementary operationalizations. First, dimensional models evaluated the abuse composite (threat dimension) and neglect composite (deprivation dimension) as predictors of the learning metrics. Second, subtype-specific models evaluated each of the five CTQ subscales as predictors of the learning metrics. In all cases, adversity variables were modeled as continuous, person-level, mean-centered predictors, along with their interactions with age (and age² when quadratic terms were retained). Accordingly, Model 4 tested whether different operationalizations of adversity predicted learning metric values at the mean baseline age (baseline effect) and developmental change in the learning metric over time (CTQ × age interaction, and CTQ × age² interaction). Because Model 4 incorporated the full set of planned variables, results from Model 4 are reported.  
   112→Correction for multiple comparisons. For each adversity predictor model, Benjamini–Hochberg false discovery rate (FDR) 78 corrections were applied across the eight learning metrics separately for each model term (main effect of age, CTQ baseline effect, and CTQ × age interaction), treating each model term as an independent family of tests. Beyond FDR-correction, the HBA estimation procedure may add an additional layer of conservativism by attenuating age- and adversity-related effects. Specifically, the PoP-ORL model was estimated using HBA and did not condition on the age or adversity variables. Consequently, HBA ‘shrinkage’ may have reduced between-subject variation for these variables 79, and, as a result, regression coefficients estimated in the subsequent multilevel models may be attenuated, yielding comparatively conservative estimates of age- and adversity-related effects. Given the exploratory nature of these analyses, both FDR-corrected and uncorrected effects are reported for the subtype-specific analyses.
   113→
   114→Probing significant interactions. CTQ subscale × age interactions that survived FDR-correction were subjected to a series of follow-up analyses to evaluate the specificity, robustness, and boundary conditions of significant effects. First, significant interactions were re-estimated in models that simultaneously included all other CTQ subscales and the interactions of each CTQ subscale with age to evaluate whether effects were specific to a given type of adversity. Significant interaction effects were also re-estimated controlling for the CTQ Minimization/Denial scale and its interaction with age to assess the robustness of findings to potential underreporting of adverse experiences. Finally, significant interactions were further interrogated using Johnson–Neyman (J–N) analyses to identify regions of significance 80, implemented via the johnson_neyman() function in the R package interactions 81 to identify the levels of adversity at which the conditional effect of age on the learning metric (i.e., the developmental slope) was significant — i.e., demarcating the adversity ranges over which learning metric developmental slopes differed significantly from zero.
   115→
   116→Results 
   117→
   118→Learning metric developmental trajectories. Unconditional models examined learning metric developmental trajectories (see Supplemental Table 2). The traditional learning metrics demonstrated evidence of developmental improvements in task performance with Good Deck Proportion (b = .01, 95% CI [.003, .020], FDR = .016) and Net Performance (b = .02, 95% CI [.011, .028], FDR < .001) showing significant linear increases with age. However, Bad Deck Proportion did not significantly change across adolescence (p = .063). Among the POP-ORL model-derived learning metrics, only Reward Learning Rate (Arew) declined with age (b = -.04, 95% CI [-.054, -.026], FDR < .001). Punishment Learning Rate (Apun) increased with age (b = .02, 95% CI [.006, .041], FDR = .016), Win/Loss Frequency Sensitivity (βf) showed pronounced positive linear development (b = .56, 95% CI [.317, .810], FDR < .001), and the Overall Learning Rate (Arew + Apun) showed no significant age trend (b = -.02, 95% CI [-.044, .003], p = .094). Of the eight learning metrics, the non-linear age term was only retained for Go Bias (βb), with this metric showing significant linear (b = .06, 95% CI [.017, .101], FDR = .013) and quadratic development (b = .02, 95% CI [.006, .030], FDR = .033), indicating accelerating change across the observed age range. These trajectories are consistent with the developmental patterns observed in our previous report with some quantitative variation in this subsample (see 44 Supplemental Table 2). 
   119→
   120→Dimensions of childhood adversity and learning metric development. The dimensional framework was used to test whether broad dimensions of adversity — abuse (threat) and neglect (deprivation) — were associated with developmental differences in the learning metrics. Composite Abuse predicted attenuations in the normative age-related increases in Good Deck Proportion, Go Bias, and Punishment Learning Rate, as well as an age-related decrease in Overall Learning Rate. Composite Neglect predicted a dampening of the normative quadratic increase in Go Bias across age. However, these results did not survive FDR-correction, which further motivated interrogation of subtype-specific effects of childhood adversity. See Supplemental Table 3 for a summary of Model 4 results and Supplemental Table 4 for full nested model results. 
   121→
   122→Adversity subtypes and learning metric development. Because abuse and neglect encompass heterogeneous experiences that may exert unique effects, subtype-specific models tested how particular types of adversity uniquely influence learning development. Similar to the dimensional model results, there were a number of subtype-specific effects of adversity on learning metric development that were significant at an uncorrected threshold. As detailed below, several subtype-specific effects survived FDR-correction (see Figure 1). Across the corrected and uncorrected effects, nearly all effects reflected attenuation of normative development, indicating that childhood adversity exerts pervasive influences on the maturation of valenced learning processes in adolescence. See Table 3 for a summary of the corrected and uncorrected Model 4 results for each adversity subtype.
   123→Effects of emotional abuse. Emotional abuse predicted an attenuation in the normative age-related increase in Punishment Learning Rate (FDR = .048; Figure 1A top panel), and this interaction remained significant after adjusting for the CTQ Minimization/Denial scale and the other CTQ subscales (p < .05). J-N analyses revealed that Punishment Learning Rates had significant positive development when the EA severity score was below 7.8, had significant negative development when the EA score was above 18.7, and that there was no significant age-related change when the EA scores were between those values (p = .006; Figure 1A bottom panel). 
   124→Effects of physical abuse. Physical abuse predicted attenuations in the linear age-related increases in Go Bias (FDR = .024; Figure 1B top panel), and this interaction remained significant after adjusting for the other CTQ subscales and the CTQ Minimization/Denial scale (p < .05). J-N analyses revealed that Go Bias had significant positive development when the PA severity score was below 6.3, had significant negative development when the PA score was above 14.5, and that there was no significant age-related change when the PA scores were between those values (p < .006; Figure 1B bottom panel). Physical abuse also predicted attenuations in the normative age-related increases in Good Deck Proportion (FDR = .006; Figure 1C top panel), and this interaction remained significant after adjusting for the other CTQ subscales and the CTQ Minimization/Denial scale (p < .05). J-N analyses revealed that Good Deck Proportion had significant positive development when the PA severity score was below 5.9, had significant negative development when the PA score was above 9.5, and that there was no significant age-related change when the PA scores were between those values (p < .001; Figure 1C bottom panel). 
   125→
   126→
   127→[Insert Figure 1]
   128→
   129→
   130→[Insert Table 3]
   131→
   132→
   133→
   134→
   135→
   136→
   137→
   138→Figure 1. Effects of Adversity Subtypes on Learning Metric Development Surviving FDR-Correction. (A) Effect of Emotional Abuse on Punishment Learning Rate. (B) Effect of Physical Abuse on Go Bias. (C) Effect of Physical Abuse on Good Deck Proportion Played. Upper plots show predicted developmental trajectories for learning metrics across age at high (+1 SD; orange) and low (−1 SD; green) levels of the indicated CTQ subscale. Lower plots show results of J–N analyses with dashed vertical lines demarcating the levels of adversity severity at which the learning metric shows significant development. Blue (red) segments of the fit line indicate significant positive (negative) development and gray segments indicate levels of adversity for which development in the learning metric was not significantly different from zero. The solid vertical line demarcates the CTQ subscale score threshold for “moderate severity” as defined by Bernstein and Fink, 1998 64.                
   139→
   140→
   141→
   142→
   143→
   144→
   145→Table 3. Effects of Adversity Subtypes on Learning Metric Development. Summary of corrected and uncorrected effects of subtype-specific childhood adversity predictors (CTQ subscales) on learning metric developmental trajectories. 
   146→
   147→
   148→Discussion
   149→
   150→To examine how different types of childhood adversity influence valenced learning during adolescence, we combined a subtype-specific characterization of adversity, a behavioral task and reinforcement learning model that capture distinct component learning processes, and a longitudinal design covering a broad span of adolescence (ages 9–17). Different types of abuse were found to exert dissociable effects on the development of distinct valenced learning processes across adolescence. Emotional abuse predicted an attenuation of normative age-related increases in punishment learning rate — the speed or volatility of updating value estimates in response to a loss. In contrast, physical abuse predicted attenuations of normative age-related increases in go bias — a general tendency to play across all decks — as well as attenuations in normative increases in playing from advantageous decks. These effects demonstrated specificity and robustness as they remained significant after adjusting for all other adversity subtypes and for the potential underreporting of adversity. Building on previous findings that suggest adversity negatively impacts learning 5–9, these results provide some of the first evidence linking specific types of abuse to altered development of distinct valenced learning processes, highlighting potential pathways through which different types of adversity may confer different risks for psychopathology. 
   151→The unique effect of emotional abuse blunting the development of rapid learning from punishment suggests a distinct pathway by which emotional abuse may lead to psychopathology. Given that learning rates are context-dependent and optimal learning rates vary according to task structure 53,82–84, this effect should be interpreted in light of how the punishment learning rate functions in this specific task context 44,58,85. In the PoP-IGT, higher punishment learning rates are associated with better performance 44 and, in the context of this task, we found they typically increased across adolescence, tracking age-related improvements in task success. Extrapolating from this, suboptimal outcomes may follow when early experiences calibrate punishment learning rates to environmental conditions that are not well-matched to later environmental demands. In emotionally abusive contexts, criticism, rejection, or hostility may be poorly contingent on the child's behavior, making these “punishment signals” an unreliable source of information to guide behavior. From a computational perspective, a rational adaptation to such an environment could be to reduce one’s learning in response to punishments, which is consistent with evidence that adversity blunts threat learning7. Such an adaptation, however, could confer risk for psychopathology if individuals fail to update expectations or adjust behavior in response to punishment signals that are informative. In contrast to this account, internalizing symptoms have actually been linked to higher punishment learning rates 86,87, as has anxiety in the PoP-IGT specifically 85. Future work is needed to reconcile these findings. Punishment learning is increasingly recognized as an important yet understudied mechanism of psychopathology 88, and the current findings offer one potential pathway by which early experiences may alter the typical maturation of punishment learning such that it increases vulnerability.  
   152→In contrast, physical abuse showed a unique effect of blunting developmental increases in task engagement, which limited opportunities to discover and earn rewards from the advantageous decks. Diminished engagement may also reflect a rational adaptation to early adverse environments. Physical abuse is often characterized by aversive events that are unpredictable, uncontrollable, or weakly contingent on the child's behavior, making generalized avoidance an adaptive response to ensure safety. Consistent with this account, childhood adversity 50, maltreatment specifically 89, and early unpredictability 90 have all been linked to reduced exploratory behavior. Unpredictable abuse may also foster passivity by shaping expectations that outcomes are not contingent on one’s actions. This account mirrors classic animal models in which learned helplessness results from prolonged exposure to uncontrollable aversive stimuli 91, and aligns with evidence in humans that early adversity is associated with reduced perceptions of agency 47. If abused individuals generalize perceptions of low control and passivity to more favorable environments, they would be less likely to engage with potentially rewarding opportunities38, consistent with our observation of reduced play on good decks and consistent with classic behavioral theories of depression 92.
   153→Taken together, these findings provide evidence that childhood adversity becomes embedded in learning systems in subtype-specific ways. In addition to providing evidence of these dissociable effects, we also demonstrated that the blunting of developmental trajectories for different learning processes occurred at much lower levels of adversity than the “moderate severity” thresholds previously identified as clinically significant 64. For example, for physical abuse, endorsing even a single item (e.g., people in my family hit me so hard that it left me with bruises or marks) as “rarely true” or greater was associated with an attenuation of developmental increases in go bias (a non-significant developmental trajectory). For emotional abuse, endorsing even a single item (e.g., people in my family said hurtful or insulting things to me) as “often true” or greater was associated with an attenuation of developmental increases in punishment learning rate. When youth endorsed emotional and physical abuse at higher severity levels, normative patterns were reversed, with age-related declines in the respective learning process trajectories. These findings suggest that developmental alterations in valenced learning may emerge at levels of adversity below conventional thresholds for clinical significance and underscore the importance of considering these lower adversity levels when evaluating clinical risk. Further, as the endorsement of a single item for the emotional and physical abuse subscales was associated with developmental alterations, it suggests research may benefit from assessments that capture lower levels of adversity exposure. 
   154→Our null findings underscore the need for greater specificity when measuring both adversity and learning processes. First, the non-specific aggregate variables (summary score of net success and composite variables for abuse vs. neglect) obscured dissociable effects revealed by the more precise variables. Second, no operationalizations of adversity predicted differences in net success, suggesting that youth high and low in adversity reach similar behavioral outcomes through divergent learning strategies. Together, these null findings highlight the need for fine-grained characterization of adversity and learning processes to reveal not only maladaptive learning mechanisms that may increase vulnerability to psychopathology, but also atypical learning processes that may reflect adaptive alternative strategies shaped by adverse environments.
   155→Overall, while the current results suggest that the effects of adversity on valenced learning may be narrow and process-specific, they do not challenge the seminal dimensional model of adversity and psychopathology 15,20. Rather, they extend more recent formulations of the theory that emphasize learning systems as key targets of adversity 5, while also refining the candidate processes through which different types of adversity may increase risk for different psychiatric symptoms. Further, our findings add to a growing body of work9 that indicate behavioral tasks provide a sensitive means of assessing adversity-related alterations in learning that may be more difficult to detect using self-reports of reward or punishment processing or in contexts where direct assessment of adversity is challenging. Moreover, the specificity of these learning alterations suggests potential targets 93 for early intervention, such as promoting reflection on negative outcomes and their causes among youth who show diminished learning from punishment and encouraging greater engagement with potentially rewarding opportunities among youth exhibiting low levels of engagement.
   156→        
   157→
   158→
   159→
   160→
   161→
   162→
   163→
   164→
   165→
   166→
   167→References
   168→
   169→1.      Afifi, T. O. et al. Population Attributable Fractions of Psychiatric Disorders and Suicide Ideation and Attempts Associated With Adverse Childhood Experiences. Am J Public Health 98, 946–952 (2008).
   170→2.      Bellis, M. A. et al. Life course health consequences and associated annual costs of adverse childhood experiences across Europe and North America: a systematic review and meta-analysis. The Lancet Public Health 4, e517–e528 (2019).
   171→3.      Grummitt, L., Baldwin, J. R., Lafoa’i, J., Keyes, K. M. & Barrett, E. L. Burden of Mental Disorders and Suicide Attributable to Childhood Maltreatment. JAMA Psychiatry 81, 782–788 (2024).
   172→4.      Kessler, R. C. et al. Childhood adversities and adult psychopathology in the WHO World Mental  Health Surveys. Br J Psychiatry 197, 378–385 (2010).
   173→5.      McLaughlin, K. A., DeCross, S. N., Jovanovic, T. & Tottenham, N. Mechanisms linking childhood adversity with psychopathology: Learning as an intervention target. Behaviour Research and Therapy 118, 101–109 (2019).
   174→6.      Sheridan, M. A. et al. Early deprivation disruption of associative learning is a developmental pathway to depression and social problems. Nat Commun 9, 2216 (2018).
   175→7.      Ruge, J. et al. How adverse childhood experiences get under the skin: A systematic review, integration and methodological discussion on threat and reward learning mechanisms. eLife 13, e92700 (2024).
   176→8.      Hanson, J. L., Williams, A. V., Bangasser, D. A. & Peña, C. J. Impact of Early Life Stress on Reward Circuit Function and Regulation. Front. Psychiatry 12, 744690 (2021).
   177→9.      Oltean, L.-E., Șoflău, R., Miu, A. C. & Szentágotai-Tătar, A. Childhood adversity and impaired reward processing: A meta-analysis. Child Abuse & Neglect 142, 105596 (2023).
   178→10.     Adams, R. A., Huys, Q. J. M. & Roiser, J. P. Computational Psychiatry: towards a mathematically informed understanding of mental illness. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry jnnp-2015-310737 (2015) doi:10.1136/jnnp-2015-310737.
   179→11.     Hauser, T. U., Will, G., Dubois, M. & Dolan, R. J. Annual Research Review: Developmental computational psychiatry. J Child Psychol Psychiatr 60, 412–426 (2019).
   180→12.     Maia, T. V. & Frank, M. J. From reinforcement learning models to psychiatric and neurological disorders. Nat Neurosci 14, 154–162 (2011).
   181→13.     Nussenbaum, K. & Hartley, C. A. Understanding the development of reward learning through the lens of meta-learning. Nat Rev Psychol 3, 424–438 (2024).
   182→14.     Andersen, S. L. & Teicher, M. H. Stress, sensitive periods and maturational events in adolescent depression. Trends in Neurosciences 31, 183–191 (2008).
   183→15.     McLaughlin, K. A., Sheridan, M. A. & Lambert, H. K. Childhood adversity and neural development: Deprivation and threat as distinct dimensions of early experience. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews 47, 578–591 (2014).
   184→16.     Somerville, L. H., Jones, R. M. & Casey, B. J. A time of change: Behavioral and neural correlates of adolescent sensitivity to appetitive and aversive environmental cues. Brain and Cognition 72, 124–133 (2010).
   185→17.     Tottenham, N. & Galván, A. Stress and the adolescent brain. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews 70, 217–227 (2016).
   186→18.     Ellis, B. J., Sheridan, M. A., Belsky, J. & McLaughlin, K. A. Why and how does early adversity influence development? Toward an integrated model of dimensions of environmental experience. Development and Psychopathology 34, 447–471 (2022).
   187→19.     McLaughlin, K. A., Sheridan, M. A., Humphreys, K. L., Belsky, J. & Ellis, B. J. The Value of Dimensional Models of Early Experience: Thinking Clearly about Concepts and Categories. Perspect Psychol Sci 16, 1463–1472 (2021).
   188→20.     Sheridan, M. A. & McLaughlin, K. A. Dimensions of early experience and neural development: deprivation and threat. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 18, 580–585 (2014).
   189→21.     Miller, A. B. et al. Dimensions of deprivation and threat, psychopathology, and potential mediators: A multi-year longitudinal analysis. Journal of Abnormal Psychology 127, 160–170 (2018).
   190→22.     McLaughlin, K. A., Weissman, D. & Bitrán, D. Childhood Adversity and Neural Development: A Systematic Review. Annu. Rev. Dev. Psychol. 1, 277–312 (2019).
   191→23.     Vogel, S. C., Perry, R. E., Brandes-Aitken, A., Braren, S. & Blair, C. Deprivation and threat as developmental mediators in the relation between early life socioeconomic status and executive functioning outcomes in early childhood. Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience 47, 100907 (2021).
   192→24.     Lee, A. H. et al. Do dimensions of childhood adversity differ in their direct associations with youth psychopathology? A meta-analysis. Dev Psychopathol 37, 871–901 (2025).
   193→25.     Mersky, J. P. & Lee, C. P. Dimensional Modeling of Adverse Childhood Experiences: An Empirical Analysis and Critique. Child Maltreat 10775595251415193 (2026) doi:10.1177/10775595251415193.
   194→26.     Smith, K. E. & Pollak, S. D. Rethinking Concepts and Categories for Understanding the Neurodevelopmental Effects of Childhood Adversity. Perspect Psychol Sci 16, 67–93 (2021).
   195→27.     Haim-Nachum, S. et al. Childhood maltreatment and its associations with trauma-related psychopathology: disentangling two classification approaches. npj Mental Health Res 3, 39 (2024).
   196→28.     Mandelli, L., Petrelli, C. & Serretti, A. The role of specific early trauma in adult depression: A meta-analysis of published literature. Childhood trauma and adult depression. European Psychiatry 30, 665–680 (2015).
   197→29.     Myroniuk, S., Reitsema, A. M., De Jonge, P. & Jeronimus, B. F. Childhood abuse and neglect and profiles of adult emotion dynamics. Dev Psychopathol 37, 222–240 (2025).
   198→30.     Norman, R. E. et al. The Long-Term Health Consequences of Child Physical Abuse, Emotional Abuse, and Neglect: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. PLoS Med 9, e1001349 (2012).
   199→31.     McCrory, E. J. & Viding, E. The theory of latent vulnerability: Reconceptualizing the link between childhood maltreatment and psychiatric disorder. Dev Psychopathol 27, 493–505 (2015).
   200→32.     Christakou, A. et al. Neural and Psychological Maturation of Decision-making in Adolescence and Young Adulthood. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 25, 1807–1823 (2013).

[showing lines 1-200 of 347; use offset=201 with limit to continue reading]